[< 4.2 Operation System](4.2_operation_system.md) | [Table of Contents](readme.md) | [4.4 Discrete Event Simulation >](4.4_discrete_event_simulation.md)

# 4.3 Scene and Object
The scene library is designed to control the scene canvas and the objects within it.

## <a id='scene'>Scene</a>
This part of the functions include setting up the scene, adding lookup objects, and coordinate transformation tools.

<a id='scene.setenv'> scene.setenv (opttab) </a>

Set scene according to options in the opttab. No return. The list of options:
- clear: Clear all objects in the scene if set it to true. Default is false. This can be used in the middle of a script, because the scene will be automatically cleaned up when the script starts running.
- camtype: Set the camera to perspective ("persp") or orthographic ("ortho") projection. Default is "persp".
- grid: Set up a reference grid on the xz plane ("plane") or the surface of the unit sphere ("sphere"). Default is "none".
- bgcolor: Set background color. A color string such as "black" or "#000000" can be used. Default is "white".
- rotspeed: The speed of rotation for mouse dragging. Default is 1.
- transpeed: The speed of translation for mouse dragging. Default is 1.
- near: Camera frustum near plane. Default is 2.
- far: Camera frustum far plane. Default is 3000.

Here is a sample code for setting the camera projection and background color:
```
scene.setenv({camtype='ortho', bgcolor='black'})
```

<a id='scene.addobj'> scene.addobj (type [, opttab]) </a>

Add an object to (0, 0, 0) of the scene with specific type and options. Return the object. The type includes: 
- "points": Discrete points in 3D. Use these options: vertices, selectable, color, opacity, hcolor, size.
- "polyline": A 3D polyline. Use these options: vertices, selectable, color, opacity, hcolor, size.
- "polygon": A 2D polygon in xy plane and extruded in z(size) direction. Use these options: vertices, selectable, color, opacity, hcolor, size.
- "mesh": A mesh. Use these options: vertices, selectable, color, opacity, hcolor.
- "box":  A box with six faces. Use these options: width, height, length, selectable, color, opacity, hcolor.
- "sphere": A sphere. Use these options: radius, segments, selectable, color, opacity, hcolor.
- "label": A text label that always faces towards the camera. Use these options: text, font, selectable, color, opacity, hcolor, size.
- "light": A directional light which always points to (0, 0, 0). Use the opacity option.
- ".json": A Threejs JSON file. Use these options: selectable, hcolor.
- ".gltf": A GLTF file. Use these options: selectable, hcolor.
- ".glb": A GLB file. Use these options: selectable, hcolor.
- ".geojson": A GeoJSON file. Use these options: selectable, color, opacity, hcolor.

The list of options in opttab:

- vertices: A array in which each three numbers represent a 3D point (x, y, z). For a mesh, every three points compose a triangle. The normal is follow the **right-hand** rule. Default is empty.
- width: For boxes measured in x axis. Default is 1.
- height: For boxes measured  in y axis. Default is 1.
- length: For boxes measured  in z axis. Default is 1.
- size: Thickness or width. Default is 1.
- radius: For spheres. Default is 1.
- segments: For sphere meshes horizontal segments and 1/2 vertical segments. Default is 32.
- selectable: The object can be selected if it is true. Default is true.
- color: Material color such as "red" or "#FF0000". Default is "gray".
- hcolor: Highlight color if selected. Default is "red".
- opacity: How transparent the material is. Default is 1.
- name: A string can be used by scene.getobj later. Default is "".
- text: Used by label. Default is "".
- font: Used by label. Default is "Arial".

Here is are some samples for adding objects to the scene:
```
scene.setenv({grid='plane'})                                                 --set a plane grid
scene.addobj("points", {vertices={0,0,0, 5,5,5}, size=5})                    --add two points with size of 5
scene.addobj("polyline", {vertices={0,0,0, -2,3,5, 4,6,7}, color='blue'})    --add a blue polyline
scene.addobj("polygon", {vertices={-1,-1,0, -1,1,0, 1,1,0, 1,-1,0}, size=0}) --add a 2D polygon
scene.addobj("label", {text="hello", size=5})                                --add a label
scene.render()                                                               --render the scene
```

<a id='scene.getobj'> scene.getobj (name) </a>

Searches through the scene, and returns the first with a matching name. Camera and selected object can be found with "camera" and "seleted".

<a id='scene.tovector'> scene.tovector (radius, phi, theta) </a>

Return x, y, z from conversion of a spherical coordinates.

<a id='scene.topolar'> scene.topolar (x, y, z) </a>

Return a spherical coordinates: radius, phi, theta from a vector.

<a id='scene.render'> scene.render ([ms]) </a>

Render the scene and check the browser like [os.getready](4.2_operation_system.md#os.getready) and return the same. The interval (milliseconds) between renders can be controlled via the ms parameter.

## Object
This part of functions control the objects in the scene. Note that a call obj:func(args) is syntactic sugar for scene.func(obj, args).

<a id='obj:getpos'> obj:getpos () </a>

Return the position: x, y, z of the object.

<a id='obj:setpos'> obj:setpos (x, y, z) </a>

Set the position: x, y, z of the object. If the object is a orthographic camera, the z is also used as the zoom value of the camera.

<a id='obj:getrot'> obj:getrot () </a>

Return the [rotation](3.4_navigating_scenes.md)(in radians): x, y, z of the object.

<a id='obj:setrot'> obj:setrot (x, y, z) </a>

Set the [rotation](3.4_navigating_scenes.md)(in radians): x, y, z of the object.

<a id='obj:getscale'> obj:getscale () </a>

Return the scale: x, y, z of the object.

<a id='obj:setscale'> obj:setscale (x, y, z) </a>

Set the scale: x, y, z of the object.

<a id='obj:getchildren'> obj:getchildren () </a>

Get all child objects and put them in a table as the return value.

<a id='obj:setchildren'> obj:setchildren (childtab) </a>

Set all objects in the table childtab as children for the object.

<a id='obj:getparent'> obj:getparent () </a>

Return the parent of the object.

<a id='obj:setparent'> obj:setparent ([parent]) </a>

Set the parent of the object. The object can have no parent.

<a id='obj:getmat'> obj:getmat () </a>

Return the material information table of the object. The list of information:
- type: A material type string, such as <a href="https://threejs.org/docs/#api/en/materials/MeshBasicMaterial" target="_blank">"MeshBasicMaterial"</a>.
- map: A texture id number.
- color: A color string such as "red" or "#FF0000".
- opacity: A number indicating how transparent the material is.

<a id='obj:setmat'> obj:setmat (opttab) </a>

Set the material of the object from the options in opttab. The list of options:
- type: A material type string, such as <a href="https://threejs.org/docs/#api/en/materials/MeshBasicMaterial" target="_blank">"MeshBasicMaterial"</a>.
- map: A texture id number or a image file path or url like "map.jpg".
- color: A color string such as "red" or "#FF0000".
- opacity: A number indicating how transparent the material is.

<a id='obj:getvertices'> obj:getvertices () </a>

Return the array of vertices and the array of indices (if any) of the <a href="https://threejs.org/docs/#api/en/core/BufferGeometry" target="_blank">object's geometry</a>. 

<a id='obj:setvertices'> obj:setvertices (vertices [, indices]) </a>

Set the vertices (array) and indices (array, if any) of the <a href="https://threejs.org/docs/#api/en/core/BufferGeometry" target="_blank">object's geometry</a>. 

<a id='obj:getdata'> obj:getdata () </a>

Return a table which stores <a href="https://threejs.org/docs/#api/en/core/Object3D.userData" target="_blank">custom data</a> of the object. Please refer to [2.2 Searching for Countries](2.2_searching_for_countries.md) for sample codes.

<a id='obj:setdata'> obj:setdata (datatab) </a>

Write the (key, value) in the datatab to the custom data field of the object.

<a id='obj:tojson'> obj:tojson (fpath) </a>

Write the object to a Threejs JSON file of the fpath.

<a id='obj:delete'> obj:delete () </a>

Delete the object and all its children recursively. 

[< 4.2 Operation System](4.2_operation_system.md) | [Table of Contents](readme.md) | [4.4 Discrete Event Simulation >](4.4_discrete_event_simulation.md)