[< 4.4 Discrete Event Simulation](4.4_discrete_event_simulation) | [Table of Contents](readme.md)

# 4.5 Mixed Integer Programming
Linear programming and mixed integer programming are important tools in operations research, and functions and some examples for solving these models are provided here. Note that a call mip:func(args) is syntactic sugar for math.func(mip, args).

## Functions
For the convenience of explanation later, first look at a typical **Linear Programming (LP)** model:
```
       min     d1*x1 +  d2*x2 + ... +  dn*xn
subject to    a11*x1 + a12*x2 + ... + a1n*xn >= b1
              a21*x1 + a22*x2 + ... + a2n*xn >= b2
                   ........................
              am1*x1 + am2*x2 + ... + amn*xn >= bn
```
This model has n **columns** of variables and m + 1 **rows** of lower bound constraints (the objective function is also a special inequality). There are also m dual variables. **Mixed Integer Programming (MIP)** problem is an LP problem in which some variables are additionally required to be integer. In order to concisely construct mip models and solve them, we designed the following six functions. Note that a call mip:func(args) is syntactic sugar for math.func(mip, args).

<a id='math.newmip'> math.newmip ([fin]) </a>

Create a new mip model or read a model in CPLEX LP format from a file fin and return it. 

<a id='mip:addrow'> mip:addrow (coltab|colname, bndtype [, b [, rowname]]) </a>

Add a row to the model mip. 
- The table coltab contains the coefficients that the column variables need (can be sparse), such as '{1, 3, [5]=7}' or '{x1=1, x2=3, x5=7}'. A new numerically indexed column variable is automatically named "cn", where n is the current maximum number of columns plus 1.
- The colname is a single column varibale name with the coefficient of 1. 
- The bndtype if one of "min", "max", "<=", "<", ">=", ">", "=", "==", "unb", "bin", "int", which represent different bound type.
- The b (right value of inequality) and rowname is only applicable if the bndtype is one of "<=", "<", ">=", ">", "=", "==". By default the rowname (row or dual variable name) is "rm", where m is the current maximum number of rows plus 1.

<a id='mip:delrow'> mip:delrow (rownum|rowname) </a>

Delete a row frome the mip model.

<a id='mip:addcol'> mip:addcol (rowtab, bndtype, d [, colname]) </a>

Add a column to the model mip. 
- The table rowtab contains the coefficients that the row variables need (can be sparse), such as '{2, 4, [6]=8}' or '{u1=2, u2=4, u6=8}'. A new numerically indexed row variable is automatically named "rm", where m is the current maximum number of rows plus 1.
- The bndtype is one of "\~", "<=", "<", ">=", ">", "=", "==", which represent different **dual problem** bound type. Note that when the inequalities of the dual problem are added as columns to the prime problem, the signs of the coefficients need to be rejudged. For example, if the inequality with the dual constraint ">" sign is added to the column of the minimization prime, the sign of the coefficient needs to be reversed. A column using bndtype "~" can be directly added to the prime model.
- The d is right value of **dual inequality**. 
- By default the colname is "cn", where n is the current maximum number of columns plus 1.

<a id='mip:delcol'> mip:delcol (colnum|colname) </a>

Delete a column frome the mip model.

<a id='mip:solve'> mip:solve ([fout]) </a>

Solve the mip model (save the model in CPLEX LP format to a file fout). For a Linear Programming, return one of "optimal", "feasible", "infeasible", "nofeasible", "unbounded", "undefined". For a Mixed Integer Programming, return one of "optimal", "feasible", "nofeasible", "undefined".

## Example Models

[< 4.4 Discrete Event Simulation](4.4_discrete_event_simulation) | [Table of Contents](readme.md)