Lua Reference Manual (5.4)
==========================

1 – Introduction
================

Lua is a powerful, efficient, lightweight, embeddable scripting language. It supports procedural programming, object-oriented programming, functional programming, data-driven programming, and data description.

Lua combines simple procedural syntax with powerful data description constructs based on associative arrays and extensible semantics. Lua is dynamically typed, runs by interpreting bytecode with a register-based virtual machine, and has automatic memory management with a generational garbage collection, making it ideal for configuration, scripting, and rapid prototyping.

Lua is implemented as a library, written in _clean C_, the common subset of standard C and C++. The Lua distribution includes a host program called `lua`, which uses the Lua library to offer a complete, standalone Lua interpreter, for interactive or batch use. Lua is intended to be used both as a powerful, lightweight, embeddable scripting language for any program that needs one, and as a powerful but lightweight and efficient stand-alone language.

As an extension language, Lua has no notion of a "main" program: it works _embedded_ in a host client, called the _embedding program_ or simply the _host_. (Frequently, this host is the stand-alone `lua` program.) The host program can invoke functions to execute a piece of Lua code, can write and read Lua variables, and can register C functions to be called by Lua code. Through the use of C functions, Lua can be augmented to cope with a wide range of different domains, thus creating customized programming languages sharing a syntactical framework.

Lua is free software, and is provided as usual with no guarantees, as stated in its license. The implementation described in this manual is available at Lua's official web site, `www.lua.org`.

Like any other reference manual, this document is dry in places. For a discussion of the decisions behind the design of Lua, see the technical papers available at Lua's web site. For a detailed introduction to programming in Lua, see Roberto's book, _Programming in Lua_.

2 – Basic Concepts
==================

This section describes the basic concepts of the language.

2.1 – Values and Types
----------------------

Lua is a dynamically typed language. This means that variables do not have types; only values do. There are no type definitions in the language. All values carry their own type.

All values in Lua are first-class values. This means that all values can be stored in variables, passed as arguments to other functions, and returned as results.

There are eight basic types in Lua: _nil_, _boolean_, _number_, _string_, _function_, _userdata_, _thread_, and _table_. The type _nil_ has one single value, **nil**, whose main property is to be different from any other value; it often represents the absence of a useful value. The type _boolean_ has two values, **false** and **true**. Both **nil** and **false** make a condition false; they are collectively called _false values_. Any other value makes a condition true. Despite its name, **false** is frequently used as an alternative to **nil**, with the key difference that **false** behaves like a regular value in a table, while a **nil** in a table represents an absent key.

The type _number_ represents both integer numbers and real (floating-point) numbers, using two subtypes: _integer_ and _float_. Standard Lua uses 64-bit integers and double-precision (64-bit) floats, but you can also compile Lua so that it uses 32-bit integers and/or single-precision (32-bit) floats. The option with 32 bits for both integers and floats is particularly attractive for small machines and embedded systems. (See macro `LUA_32BITS` in file `luaconf.h`.)

Unless stated otherwise, any overflow when manipulating integer values _wrap around_, according to the usual rules of two-complement arithmetic. (In other words, the actual result is the unique representable integer that is equal modulo _2n_ to the mathematical result, where _n_ is the number of bits of the integer type.)

Lua has explicit rules about when each subtype is used, but it also converts between them automatically as needed (see [§3.4.3](#3.4.3)). Therefore, the programmer may choose to mostly ignore the difference between integers and floats or to assume complete control over the representation of each number.

The type _string_ represents immutable sequences of bytes. Lua is 8-bit clean: strings can contain any 8-bit value, including embedded zeros ('`\0`'). Lua is also encoding-agnostic; it makes no assumptions about the contents of a string. The length of any string in Lua must fit in a Lua integer.

Lua can call (and manipulate) functions written in Lua and functions written in C (see [§3.4.10](#3.4.10)). Both are represented by the type _function_.

The type _userdata_ is provided to allow arbitrary C data to be stored in Lua variables. A userdata value represents a block of raw memory. There are two kinds of userdata: _full userdata_, which is an object with a block of memory managed by Lua, and _light userdata_, which is simply a C pointer value. Userdata has no predefined operations in Lua, except assignment and identity test. By using _metatables_, the programmer can define operations for full userdata values (see [§2.4](#2.4)). Userdata values cannot be created or modified in Lua, only through the C API. This guarantees the integrity of data owned by the host program and C libraries.

The type _thread_ represents independent threads of execution and it is used to implement coroutines (see [§2.6](#2.6)). Lua threads are not related to operating-system threads. Lua supports coroutines on all systems, even those that do not support threads natively.

The type _table_ implements associative arrays, that is, arrays that can have as indices not only numbers, but any Lua value except **nil** and NaN. (_Not a Number_ is a special floating-point value used by the IEEE 754 standard to represent undefined numerical results, such as `0/0`.) Tables can be _heterogeneous_; that is, they can contain values of all types (except **nil**). Any key associated to the value **nil** is not considered part of the table. Conversely, any key that is not part of a table has an associated value **nil**.

Tables are the sole data-structuring mechanism in Lua; they can be used to represent ordinary arrays, lists, symbol tables, sets, records, graphs, trees, etc. To represent records, Lua uses the field name as an index. The language supports this representation by providing `a.name` as syntactic sugar for `a["name"]`. There are several convenient ways to create tables in Lua (see [§3.4.9](#3.4.9)).

Like indices, the values of table fields can be of any type. In particular, because functions are first-class values, table fields can contain functions. Thus tables can also carry _methods_ (see [§3.4.11](#3.4.11)).

The indexing of tables follows the definition of raw equality in the language. The expressions `a[i]` and `a[j]` denote the same table element if and only if `i` and `j` are raw equal (that is, equal without metamethods). In particular, floats with integral values are equal to their respective integers (e.g., `1.0 == 1`). To avoid ambiguities, any float used as a key that is equal to an integer is converted to that integer. For instance, if you write `a[2.0] = true`, the actual key inserted into the table will be the integer `2`.

Tables, functions, threads, and (full) userdata values are _objects_: variables do not actually _contain_ these values, only _references_ to them. Assignment, parameter passing, and function returns always manipulate references to such values; these operations do not imply any kind of copy.

The library function [`type`](#pdf-type) returns a string describing the type of a given value (see [`type`](#pdf-type)).

2.2 – Environments and the Global Environment
---------------------------------------------

As we will discuss further in [§3.2](#3.2) and [§3.3.3](#3.3.3), any reference to a free name (that is, a name not bound to any declaration) `var` is syntactically translated to `_ENV.var`. Moreover, every chunk is compiled in the scope of an external local variable named `_ENV` (see [§3.3.2](#3.3.2)), so `_ENV` itself is never a free name in a chunk.

Despite the existence of this external `_ENV` variable and the translation of free names, `_ENV` is a completely regular name. In particular, you can define new variables and parameters with that name. Each reference to a free name uses the `_ENV` that is visible at that point in the program, following the usual visibility rules of Lua (see [§3.5](#3.5)).

Any table used as the value of `_ENV` is called an _environment_.

Lua keeps a distinguished environment called the _global environment_. This value is kept at a special index in the C registry. In Lua, the global variable [`_G`](#pdf-_G) is initialized with this same value. ([`_G`](#pdf-_G) is never used internally, so changing its value will affect only your own code.)

When Lua loads a chunk, the default value for its `_ENV` variable is the global environment (see [`load`](#pdf-load)). Therefore, by default, free names in Lua code refer to entries in the global environment and, therefore, they are also called _global variables_. Moreover, all standard libraries are loaded in the global environment and some functions there operate on that environment. You can use [`load`](#pdf-load) (or [`loadfile`](#pdf-loadfile)) to load a chunk with a different environment. (In C, you have to load the chunk and then change the value of its first upvalue; see [`lua_setupvalue`](#lua_setupvalue).)

2.3 – Error Handling
--------------------

Several operations in Lua can _raise_ an error. An error interrupts the normal flow of the program, which can continue by _catching_ the error.

Lua code can explicitly raise an error by calling the [`error`](#pdf-error) function. (This function never returns.)

To catch errors in Lua, you can do a _protected call_, using [`pcall`](#pdf-pcall) (or [`xpcall`](#pdf-xpcall)). The function [`pcall`](#pdf-pcall) calls a given function in _protected mode_. Any error while running the function stops its execution, and control returns immediately to `pcall`, which returns a status code.

Because Lua is an embedded extension language, Lua code starts running by a call from C code in the host program. (When you use Lua standalone, the `lua` application is the host program.) Usually, this call is protected; so, when an otherwise unprotected error occurs during the compilation or execution of a Lua chunk, control returns to the host, which can take appropriate measures, such as printing an error message.

Whenever there is an error, an _error object_ is propagated with information about the error. Lua itself only generates errors whose error object is a string, but programs may generate errors with any value as the error object. It is up to the Lua program or its host to handle such error objects. For historical reasons, an error object is often called an _error message_, even though it does not have to be a string.

When you use [`xpcall`](#pdf-xpcall) (or [`lua_pcall`](#lua_pcall), in C) you may give a _message handler_ to be called in case of errors. This function is called with the original error object and returns a new error object. It is called before the error unwinds the stack, so that it can gather more information about the error, for instance by inspecting the stack and creating a stack traceback. This message handler is still protected by the protected call; so, an error inside the message handler will call the message handler again. If this loop goes on for too long, Lua breaks it and returns an appropriate message. The message handler is called only for regular runtime errors. It is not called for memory-allocation errors nor for errors while running finalizers or other message handlers.

Lua also offers a system of _warnings_ (see [`warn`](#pdf-warn)). Unlike errors, warnings do not interfere in any way with program execution. They typically only generate a message to the user, although this behavior can be adapted from C (see [`lua_setwarnf`](#lua_setwarnf)).

2.4 – Metatables and Metamethods
--------------------------------

Every value in Lua can have a _metatable_. This _metatable_ is an ordinary Lua table that defines the behavior of the original value under certain events. You can change several aspects of the behavior of a value by setting specific fields in its metatable. For instance, when a non-numeric value is the operand of an addition, Lua checks for a function in the field `__add` of the value's metatable. If it finds one, Lua calls this function to perform the addition.

The key for each event in a metatable is a string with the event name prefixed by two underscores; the corresponding value is called a _metavalue_. For most events, the metavalue must be a function, which is then called a _metamethod_. In the previous example, the key is the string "`__add`" and the metamethod is the function that performs the addition. Unless stated otherwise, a metamethod may in fact be any callable value, which is either a function or a value with a `__call` metamethod.

You can query the metatable of any value using the [`getmetatable`](#pdf-getmetatable) function. Lua queries metamethods in metatables using a raw access (see [`rawget`](#pdf-rawget)).

You can replace the metatable of tables using the [`setmetatable`](#pdf-setmetatable) function. You cannot change the metatable of other types from Lua code, except by using the debug library ([§4.10](#4.10)).

Tables and full userdata have individual metatables, although multiple tables and userdata can share their metatables. Values of all other types share one single metatable per type; that is, there is one single metatable for all numbers, one for all strings, etc. By default, a value has no metatable, but the string library sets a metatable for the string type (see [§4.4](#4.4)).

A detailed list of operations controlled by metatables is given next. Each event is identified by its corresponding key. By convention, all metatable keys used by Lua are composed by two underscores followed by lowercase Latin letters.

*   **`__add`:** the addition (`+`) operation. If any operand for an addition is not a number, Lua will try to call a metamethod. It starts by checking the first operand (even if it is a number); if that operand does not define a metamethod for `__add`, then Lua will check the second operand. If Lua can find a metamethod, it calls the metamethod with the two operands as arguments, and the result of the call (adjusted to one value) is the result of the operation. Otherwise, if no metamethod is found, Lua raises an error.
*   **`__sub`:** the subtraction (`-`) operation. Behavior similar to the addition operation.
*   **`__mul`:** the multiplication (`*`) operation. Behavior similar to the addition operation.
*   **`__div`:** the division (`/`) operation. Behavior similar to the addition operation.
*   **`__mod`:** the modulo (`%`) operation. Behavior similar to the addition operation.
*   **`__pow`:** the exponentiation (`^`) operation. Behavior similar to the addition operation.
*   **`__unm`:** the negation (unary `-`) operation. Behavior similar to the addition operation.
*   **`__idiv`:** the floor division (`//`) operation. Behavior similar to the addition operation.
*   **`__band`:** the bitwise AND (`&`) operation. Behavior similar to the addition operation, except that Lua will try a metamethod if any operand is neither an integer nor a float coercible to an integer (see [§3.4.3](#3.4.3)).
*   **`__bor`:** the bitwise OR (`|`) operation. Behavior similar to the bitwise AND operation.
*   **`__bxor`:** the bitwise exclusive OR (binary `~`) operation. Behavior similar to the bitwise AND operation.
*   **`__bnot`:** the bitwise NOT (unary `~`) operation. Behavior similar to the bitwise AND operation.
*   **`__shl`:** the bitwise left shift (`<<`) operation. Behavior similar to the bitwise AND operation.
*   **`__shr`:** the bitwise right shift (`>>`) operation. Behavior similar to the bitwise AND operation.
*   **`__concat`:** the concatenation (`..`) operation. Behavior similar to the addition operation, except that Lua will try a metamethod if any operand is neither a string nor a number (which is always coercible to a string).
*   **`__len`:** the length (`#`) operation. If the object is not a string, Lua will try its metamethod. If there is a metamethod, Lua calls it with the object as argument, and the result of the call (always adjusted to one value) is the result of the operation. If there is no metamethod but the object is a table, then Lua uses the table length operation (see [§3.4.7](#3.4.7)). Otherwise, Lua raises an error.
*   **`__eq`:** the equal (`==`) operation. Behavior similar to the addition operation, except that Lua will try a metamethod only when the values being compared are either both tables or both full userdata and they are not primitively equal. The result of the call is always converted to a boolean.
*   **`__lt`:** the less than (`<`) operation. Behavior similar to the addition operation, except that Lua will try a metamethod only when the values being compared are neither both numbers nor both strings. Moreover, the result of the call is always converted to a boolean.
*   **`__le`:** the less equal (`<=`) operation. Behavior similar to the less than operation.
*   **`__index`:** The indexing access operation `table[key]`. This event happens when `table` is not a table or when `key` is not present in `table`. The metavalue is looked up in the metatable of `table`.
    
    The metavalue for this event can be either a function, a table, or any value with an `__index` metavalue. If it is a function, it is called with `table` and `key` as arguments, and the result of the call (adjusted to one value) is the result of the operation. Otherwise, the final result is the result of indexing this metavalue with `key`. This indexing is regular, not raw, and therefore can trigger another `__index` metavalue.
    
*   **`__newindex`:** The indexing assignment `table[key] = value`. Like the index event, this event happens when `table` is not a table or when `key` is not present in `table`. The metavalue is looked up in the metatable of `table`.
    
    Like with indexing, the metavalue for this event can be either a function, a table, or any value with an `__newindex` metavalue. If it is a function, it is called with `table`, `key`, and `value` as arguments. Otherwise, Lua repeats the indexing assignment over this metavalue with the same key and value. This assignment is regular, not raw, and therefore can trigger another `__newindex` metavalue.
    
    Whenever a `__newindex` metavalue is invoked, Lua does not perform the primitive assignment. If needed, the metamethod itself can call [`rawset`](#pdf-rawset) to do the assignment.
    
*   **`__call`:** The call operation `func(args)`. This event happens when Lua tries to call a non-function value (that is, `func` is not a function). The metamethod is looked up in `func`. If present, the metamethod is called with `func` as its first argument, followed by the arguments of the original call (`args`). All results of the call are the results of the operation. This is the only metamethod that allows multiple results.

In addition to the previous list, the interpreter also respects the following keys in metatables: `__gc` (see [§2.5.3](#2.5.3)), `__close` (see [§3.3.8](#3.3.8)), `__mode` (see [§2.5.4](#2.5.4)), and `__name`. (The entry `__name`, when it contains a string, may be used by [`tostring`](#pdf-tostring) and in error messages.)

For the unary operators (negation, length, and bitwise NOT), the metamethod is computed and called with a dummy second operand, equal to the first one. This extra operand is only to simplify Lua's internals (by making these operators behave like a binary operation) and may be removed in future versions. For most uses this extra operand is irrelevant.

Because metatables are regular tables, they can contain arbitrary fields, not only the event names defined above. Some functions in the standard library (e.g., [`tostring`](#pdf-tostring)) use other fields in metatables for their own purposes.

It is a good practice to add all needed metamethods to a table before setting it as a metatable of some object. In particular, the `__gc` metamethod works only when this order is followed (see [§2.5.3](#2.5.3)). It is also a good practice to set the metatable of an object right after its creation.

2.5 – Garbage Collection
------------------------

Lua performs automatic memory management. This means that you do not have to worry about allocating memory for new objects or freeing it when the objects are no longer needed. Lua manages memory automatically by running a _garbage collector_ to collect all _dead_ objects. All memory used by Lua is subject to automatic management: strings, tables, userdata, functions, threads, internal structures, etc.

An object is considered _dead_ as soon as the collector can be sure the object will not be accessed again in the normal execution of the program. ("Normal execution" here excludes finalizers, which can resurrect dead objects (see [§2.5.3](#2.5.3)), and excludes also operations using the debug library.) Note that the time when the collector can be sure that an object is dead may not coincide with the programmer's expectations. The only guarantees are that Lua will not collect an object that may still be accessed in the normal execution of the program, and it will eventually collect an object that is inaccessible from Lua. (Here, _inaccessible from Lua_ means that neither a variable nor another live object refer to the object.) Because Lua has no knowledge about C code, it never collects objects accessible through the registry, which includes the global environment (see [§2.2](#2.2)).

The garbage collector (GC) in Lua can work in two modes: incremental and generational.

The default GC mode with the default parameters are adequate for most uses. However, programs that waste a large proportion of their time allocating and freeing memory can benefit from other settings. Keep in mind that the GC behavior is non-portable both across platforms and across different Lua releases; therefore, optimal settings are also non-portable.

You can change the GC mode and parameters by calling [`lua_gc`](#lua_gc) in C or [`collectgarbage`](#pdf-collectgarbage) in Lua. You can also use these functions to control the collector directly (e.g., to stop and restart it).

### 2.5.1 – Incremental Garbage Collection

In incremental mode, each GC cycle performs a mark-and-sweep collection in small steps interleaved with the program's execution. In this mode, the collector uses three numbers to control its garbage-collection cycles: the _garbage-collector pause_, the _garbage-collector step multiplier_, and the _garbage-collector step size_.

The garbage-collector pause controls how long the collector waits before starting a new cycle. The collector starts a new cycle when the use of memory hits _n%_ of the use after the previous collection. Larger values make the collector less aggressive. Values equal to or less than 100 mean the collector will not wait to start a new cycle. A value of 200 means that the collector waits for the total memory in use to double before starting a new cycle. The default value is 200; the maximum value is 1000.

The garbage-collector step multiplier controls the speed of the collector relative to memory allocation, that is, how many elements it marks or sweeps for each kilobyte of memory allocated. Larger values make the collector more aggressive but also increase the size of each incremental step. You should not use values less than 100, because they make the collector too slow and can result in the collector never finishing a cycle. The default value is 100; the maximum value is 1000.

The garbage-collector step size controls the size of each incremental step, specifically how many bytes the interpreter allocates before performing a step. This parameter is logarithmic: A value of _n_ means the interpreter will allocate _2n_ bytes between steps and perform equivalent work during the step. A large value (e.g., 60) makes the collector a stop-the-world (non-incremental) collector. The default value is 13, which means steps of approximately 8 Kbytes.

### 2.5.2 – Generational Garbage Collection

In generational mode, the collector does frequent _minor_ collections, which traverses only objects recently created. If after a minor collection the use of memory is still above a limit, the collector does a stop-the-world _major_ collection, which traverses all objects. The generational mode uses two parameters: the _minor multiplier_ and the _the major multiplier_.

The minor multiplier controls the frequency of minor collections. For a minor multiplier _x_, a new minor collection will be done when memory grows _x%_ larger than the memory in use after the previous major collection. For instance, for a multiplier of 20, the collector will do a minor collection when the use of memory gets 20% larger than the use after the previous major collection. The default value is 20; the maximum value is 200.

The major multiplier controls the frequency of major collections. For a major multiplier _x_, a new major collection will be done when memory grows _x%_ larger than the memory in use after the previous major collection. For instance, for a multiplier of 100, the collector will do a major collection when the use of memory gets larger than twice the use after the previous collection. The default value is 100; the maximum value is 1000.

### 2.5.3 – Garbage-Collection Metamethods

You can set garbage-collector metamethods for tables and, using the C API, for full userdata (see [§2.4](#2.4)). These metamethods, called _finalizers_, are called when the garbage collector detects that the corresponding table or userdata is dead. Finalizers allow you to coordinate Lua's garbage collection with external resource management such as closing files, network or database connections, or freeing your own memory.

For an object (table or userdata) to be finalized when collected, you must _mark_ it for finalization. You mark an object for finalization when you set its metatable and the metatable has a `__gc` metamethod. Note that if you set a metatable without a `__gc` field and later create that field in the metatable, the object will not be marked for finalization.

When a marked object becomes dead, it is not collected immediately by the garbage collector. Instead, Lua puts it in a list. After the collection, Lua goes through that list. For each object in the list, it checks the object's `__gc` metamethod: If it is present, Lua calls it with the object as its single argument.

At the end of each garbage-collection cycle, the finalizers are called in the reverse order that the objects were marked for finalization, among those collected in that cycle; that is, the first finalizer to be called is the one associated with the object marked last in the program. The execution of each finalizer may occur at any point during the execution of the regular code.

Because the object being collected must still be used by the finalizer, that object (and other objects accessible only through it) must be _resurrected_ by Lua. Usually, this resurrection is transient, and the object memory is freed in the next garbage-collection cycle. However, if the finalizer stores the object in some global place (e.g., a global variable), then the resurrection is permanent. Moreover, if the finalizer marks a finalizing object for finalization again, its finalizer will be called again in the next cycle where the object is dead. In any case, the object memory is freed only in a GC cycle where the object is dead and not marked for finalization.

When you close a state (see [`lua_close`](#lua_close)), Lua calls the finalizers of all objects marked for finalization, following the reverse order that they were marked. If any finalizer marks objects for collection during that phase, these marks have no effect.

Finalizers cannot yield nor run the garbage collector. Because they can run in unpredictable times, it is good practice to restrict each finalizer to the minimum necessary to properly release its associated resource.

Any error while running a finalizer generates a warning; the error is not propagated.

### 2.5.4 – Weak Tables

A _weak table_ is a table whose elements are _weak references_. A weak reference is ignored by the garbage collector. In other words, if the only references to an object are weak references, then the garbage collector will collect that object.

A weak table can have weak keys, weak values, or both. A table with weak values allows the collection of its values, but prevents the collection of its keys. A table with both weak keys and weak values allows the collection of both keys and values. In any case, if either the key or the value is collected, the whole pair is removed from the table. The weakness of a table is controlled by the `__mode` field of its metatable. This metavalue, if present, must be one of the following strings: "`k`", for a table with weak keys; "`v`", for a table with weak values; or "`kv`", for a table with both weak keys and values.

A table with weak keys and strong values is also called an _ephemeron table_. In an ephemeron table, a value is considered reachable only if its key is reachable. In particular, if the only reference to a key comes through its value, the pair is removed.

Any change in the weakness of a table may take effect only at the next collect cycle. In particular, if you change the weakness to a stronger mode, Lua may still collect some items from that table before the change takes effect.

Only objects that have an explicit construction are removed from weak tables. Values, such as numbers and light C functions, are not subject to garbage collection, and therefore are not removed from weak tables (unless their associated values are collected). Although strings are subject to garbage collection, they do not have an explicit construction and their equality is by value; they behave more like values than like objects. Therefore, they are not removed from weak tables.

Resurrected objects (that is, objects being finalized and objects accessible only through objects being finalized) have a special behavior in weak tables. They are removed from weak values before running their finalizers, but are removed from weak keys only in the next collection after running their finalizers, when such objects are actually freed. This behavior allows the finalizer to access properties associated with the object through weak tables.

If a weak table is among the resurrected objects in a collection cycle, it may not be properly cleared until the next cycle.

2.6 – Coroutines
----------------

Lua supports coroutines, also called _collaborative multithreading_. A coroutine in Lua represents an independent thread of execution. Unlike threads in multithread systems, however, a coroutine only suspends its execution by explicitly calling a yield function.

You create a coroutine by calling [`coroutine.create`](#pdf-coroutine.create). Its sole argument is a function that is the main function of the coroutine. The `create` function only creates a new coroutine and returns a handle to it (an object of type _thread_); it does not start the coroutine.

You execute a coroutine by calling [`coroutine.resume`](#pdf-coroutine.resume). When you first call [`coroutine.resume`](#pdf-coroutine.resume), passing as its first argument a thread returned by [`coroutine.create`](#pdf-coroutine.create), the coroutine starts its execution by calling its main function. Extra arguments passed to [`coroutine.resume`](#pdf-coroutine.resume) are passed as arguments to that function. After the coroutine starts running, it runs until it terminates or _yields_.

A coroutine can terminate its execution in two ways: normally, when its main function returns (explicitly or implicitly, after the last instruction); and abnormally, if there is an unprotected error. In case of normal termination, [`coroutine.resume`](#pdf-coroutine.resume) returns **true**, plus any values returned by the coroutine main function. In case of errors, [`coroutine.resume`](#pdf-coroutine.resume) returns **false** plus the error object. In this case, the coroutine does not unwind its stack, so that it is possible to inspect it after the error with the debug API.

A coroutine yields by calling [`coroutine.yield`](#pdf-coroutine.yield). When a coroutine yields, the corresponding [`coroutine.resume`](#pdf-coroutine.resume) returns immediately, even if the yield happens inside nested function calls (that is, not in the main function, but in a function directly or indirectly called by the main function). In the case of a yield, [`coroutine.resume`](#pdf-coroutine.resume) also returns **true**, plus any values passed to [`coroutine.yield`](#pdf-coroutine.yield). The next time you resume the same coroutine, it continues its execution from the point where it yielded, with the call to [`coroutine.yield`](#pdf-coroutine.yield) returning any extra arguments passed to [`coroutine.resume`](#pdf-coroutine.resume).

Like [`coroutine.create`](#pdf-coroutine.create), the [`coroutine.wrap`](#pdf-coroutine.wrap) function also creates a coroutine, but instead of returning the coroutine itself, it returns a function that, when called, resumes the coroutine. Any arguments passed to this function go as extra arguments to [`coroutine.resume`](#pdf-coroutine.resume). [`coroutine.wrap`](#pdf-coroutine.wrap) returns all the values returned by [`coroutine.resume`](#pdf-coroutine.resume), except the first one (the boolean error code). Unlike [`coroutine.resume`](#pdf-coroutine.resume), the function created by [`coroutine.wrap`](#pdf-coroutine.wrap) propagates any error to the caller. In this case, the function also closes the coroutine (see [`coroutine.close`](#pdf-coroutine.close)).

As an example of how coroutines work, consider the following code:

     function foo (a)
       print("foo", a)
       return coroutine.yield(2\*a)
     end
     
     co = coroutine.create(function (a,b)
           print("co-body", a, b)
           local r = foo(a+1)
           print("co-body", r)
           local r, s = coroutine.yield(a+b, a-b)
           print("co-body", r, s)
           return b, "end"
     end)
     
     print("main", coroutine.resume(co, 1, 10))
     print("main", coroutine.resume(co, "r"))
     print("main", coroutine.resume(co, "x", "y"))
     print("main", coroutine.resume(co, "x", "y"))

When you run it, it produces the following output:

     co-body 1       10
     foo     2
     main    true    4
     co-body r
     main    true    11      -9
     co-body x       y
     main    true    10      end
     main    false   cannot resume dead coroutine

You can also create and manipulate coroutines through the C API: see functions [`lua_newthread`](#lua_newthread), [`lua_resume`](#lua_resume), and [`lua_yield`](#lua_yield).

3 – The Language
================

This section describes the lexis, the syntax, and the semantics of Lua. In other words, this section describes which tokens are valid, how they can be combined, and what their combinations mean.

Language constructs will be explained using the usual extended BNF notation, in which {_a_} means 0 or more _a_'s, and \[_a_\] means an optional _a_. Non-terminals are shown like non-terminal, keywords are shown like **kword**, and other terminal symbols are shown like ‘**\=**’.

3.1 – Lexical Conventions
-------------------------

Lua is a free-form language. It ignores spaces and comments between lexical elements (tokens), except as delimiters between two tokens. In source code, Lua recognizes as spaces the standard ASCII whitespace characters space, form feed, newline, carriage return, horizontal tab, and vertical tab.

_Names_ (also called _identifiers_) in Lua can be any string of Latin letters, Arabic-Indic digits, and underscores, not beginning with a digit and not being a reserved word. Identifiers are used to name variables, table fields, and labels.

The following _keywords_ are reserved and cannot be used as names:

     and       break     do        else      elseif    end
     false     for       function  goto      if        in
     local     nil       not       or        repeat    return
     then      true      until     while

Lua is a case-sensitive language: `and` is a reserved word, but `And` and `AND` are two different, valid names. As a convention, programs should avoid creating names that start with an underscore followed by one or more uppercase letters (such as [`_VERSION`](#pdf-_VERSION)).

The following strings denote other tokens:

     +     -     \*     /     %     ^     #
     &     ~     |     <<    >>    //
     ==    ~=    <=    >=    <     >     =
     (     )     {     }     \[     \]     ::
     ;     :     ,     .     ..    ...

A _short literal string_ can be delimited by matching single or double quotes, and can contain the following C-like escape sequences: '`\a`' (bell), '`\b`' (backspace), '`\f`' (form feed), '`\n`' (newline), '`\r`' (carriage return), '`\t`' (horizontal tab), '`\v`' (vertical tab), '`\\`' (backslash), '`\"`' (quotation mark \[double quote\]), and '`\'`' (apostrophe \[single quote\]). A backslash followed by a line break results in a newline in the string. The escape sequence '`\z`' skips the following span of whitespace characters, including line breaks; it is particularly useful to break and indent a long literal string into multiple lines without adding the newlines and spaces into the string contents. A short literal string cannot contain unescaped line breaks nor escapes not forming a valid escape sequence.

We can specify any byte in a short literal string, including embedded zeros, by its numeric value. This can be done with the escape sequence `\x_XX_`, where _XX_ is a sequence of exactly two hexadecimal digits, or with the escape sequence `\_ddd_`, where _ddd_ is a sequence of up to three decimal digits. (Note that if a decimal escape sequence is to be followed by a digit, it must be expressed using exactly three digits.)

The UTF-8 encoding of a Unicode character can be inserted in a literal string with the escape sequence `\u{_XXX_}` (with mandatory enclosing braces), where _XXX_ is a sequence of one or more hexadecimal digits representing the character code point. This code point can be any value less than _231_. (Lua uses the original UTF-8 specification here, which is not restricted to valid Unicode code points.)

Literal strings can also be defined using a long format enclosed by _long brackets_. We define an _opening long bracket of level _n__ as an opening square bracket followed by _n_ equal signs followed by another opening square bracket. So, an opening long bracket of level 0 is written as `[[`, an opening long bracket of level 1 is written as `[=[`, and so on. A _closing long bracket_ is defined similarly; for instance, a closing long bracket of level 4 is written as `]====]`. A _long literal_ starts with an opening long bracket of any level and ends at the first closing long bracket of the same level. It can contain any text except a closing bracket of the same level. Literals in this bracketed form can run for several lines, do not interpret any escape sequences, and ignore long brackets of any other level. Any kind of end-of-line sequence (carriage return, newline, carriage return followed by newline, or newline followed by carriage return) is converted to a simple newline. When the opening long bracket is immediately followed by a newline, the newline is not included in the string.

As an example, in a system using ASCII (in which '`a`' is coded as 97, newline is coded as 10, and '`1`' is coded as 49), the five literal strings below denote the same string:

     a = 'alo\\n123"'
     a = "alo\\n123\\""
     a = '\\97lo\\10\\04923"'
     a = \[\[alo
     123"\]\]
     a = \[==\[
     alo
     123"\]==\]

Any byte in a literal string not explicitly affected by the previous rules represents itself. However, Lua opens files for parsing in text mode, and the system's file functions may have problems with some control characters. So, it is safer to represent binary data as a quoted literal with explicit escape sequences for the non-text characters.

A _numeric constant_ (or _numeral_) can be written with an optional fractional part and an optional decimal exponent, marked by a letter '`e`' or '`E`'. Lua also accepts hexadecimal constants, which start with `0x` or `0X`. Hexadecimal constants also accept an optional fractional part plus an optional binary exponent, marked by a letter '`p`' or '`P`' and written in decimal. (For instance, `0x1.fp10` denotes 1984, which is _0x1f / 16_ multiplied by _210_.)

A numeric constant with a radix point or an exponent denotes a float; otherwise, if its value fits in an integer or it is a hexadecimal constant, it denotes an integer; otherwise (that is, a decimal integer numeral that overflows), it denotes a float. Hexadecimal numerals with neither a radix point nor an exponent always denote an integer value; if the value overflows, it _wraps around_ to fit into a valid integer.

Examples of valid integer constants are

     3   345   0xff   0xBEBADA

Examples of valid float constants are

     3.0     3.1416     314.16e-2     0.31416E1     34e1
     0x0.1E  0xA23p-4   0X1.921FB54442D18P+1

A _comment_ starts with a double hyphen (`--`) anywhere outside a string. If the text immediately after `--` is not an opening long bracket, the comment is a _short comment_, which runs until the end of the line. Otherwise, it is a _long comment_, which runs until the corresponding closing long bracket.

3.2 – Variables
---------------

Variables are places that store values. There are three kinds of variables in Lua: global variables, local variables, and table fields.

A single name can denote a global variable or a local variable (or a function's formal parameter, which is a particular kind of local variable):

	var ::= Name

Name denotes identifiers (see [§3.1](#3.1)).

Any variable name is assumed to be global unless explicitly declared as a local (see [§3.3.7](#3.3.7)). Local variables are _lexically scoped_: local variables can be freely accessed by functions defined inside their scope (see [§3.5](#3.5)).

Before the first assignment to a variable, its value is **nil**.

Square brackets are used to index a table:

	var ::= prefixexp ‘**\[**’ exp ‘**\]**’

The meaning of accesses to table fields can be changed via metatables (see [§2.4](#2.4)).

The syntax `var.Name` is just syntactic sugar for `var["Name"]`:

	var ::= prefixexp ‘**.**’ Name

An access to a global variable `x` is equivalent to `_ENV.x`. Due to the way that chunks are compiled, the variable `_ENV` itself is never global (see [§2.2](#2.2)).

3.3 – Statements
----------------

Lua supports an almost conventional set of statements, similar to those in other conventional languages. This set includes blocks, assignments, control structures, function calls, and variable declarations.

### 3.3.1 – Blocks

A block is a list of statements, which are executed sequentially:

	block ::= {stat}

Lua has _empty statements_ that allow you to separate statements with semicolons, start a block with a semicolon or write two semicolons in sequence:

	stat ::= ‘**;**’

Both function calls and assignments can start with an open parenthesis. This possibility leads to an ambiguity in Lua's grammar. Consider the following fragment:

     a = b + c
     (print or io.write)('done')

The grammar could see this fragment in two ways:

     a = b + c(print or io.write)('done')
     
     a = b + c; (print or io.write)('done')

The current parser always sees such constructions in the first way, interpreting the open parenthesis as the start of the arguments to a call. To avoid this ambiguity, it is a good practice to always precede with a semicolon statements that start with a parenthesis:

     ;(print or io.write)('done')

A block can be explicitly delimited to produce a single statement:

	stat ::= **do** block **end**

Explicit blocks are useful to control the scope of variable declarations. Explicit blocks are also sometimes used to add a **return** statement in the middle of another block (see [§3.3.4](#3.3.4)).

### 3.3.2 – Chunks

The unit of compilation of Lua is called a _chunk_. Syntactically, a chunk is simply a block:

	chunk ::= block

Lua handles a chunk as the body of an anonymous function with a variable number of arguments (see [§3.4.11](#3.4.11)). As such, chunks can define local variables, receive arguments, and return values. Moreover, such anonymous function is compiled as in the scope of an external local variable called `_ENV` (see [§2.2](#2.2)). The resulting function always has `_ENV` as its only external variable, even if it does not use that variable.

A chunk can be stored in a file or in a string inside the host program. To execute a chunk, Lua first _loads_ it, precompiling the chunk's code into instructions for a virtual machine, and then Lua executes the compiled code with an interpreter for the virtual machine.

Chunks can also be precompiled into binary form; see the program `luac` and the function [`string.dump`](#pdf-string.dump) for details. Programs in source and compiled forms are interchangeable; Lua automatically detects the file type and acts accordingly (see [`load`](#pdf-load)).

### 3.3.3 – Assignment

Lua allows multiple assignments. Therefore, the syntax for assignment defines a list of variables on the left side and a list of expressions on the right side. The elements in both lists are separated by commas:

	stat ::= varlist ‘**\=**’ explist
	varlist ::= var {‘**,**’ var}
	explist ::= exp {‘**,**’ exp}

Expressions are discussed in [§3.4](#3.4).

Before the assignment, the list of values is _adjusted_ to the length of the list of variables (see [§3.4.12](#3.4.12)).

If a variable is both assigned and read inside a multiple assignment, Lua ensures that all reads get the value of the variable before the assignment. Thus the code

     i = 3
     i, a\[i\] = i+1, 20

sets `a[3]` to 20, without affecting `a[4]` because the `i` in `a[i]` is evaluated (to 3) before it is assigned 4. Similarly, the line

     x, y = y, x

exchanges the values of `x` and `y`, and

     x, y, z = y, z, x

cyclically permutes the values of `x`, `y`, and `z`.

Note that this guarantee covers only accesses syntactically inside the assignment statement. If a function or a metamethod called during the assignment changes the value of a variable, Lua gives no guarantees about the order of that access.

An assignment to a global name `x = val` is equivalent to the assignment `_ENV.x = val` (see [§2.2](#2.2)).

The meaning of assignments to table fields and global variables (which are actually table fields, too) can be changed via metatables (see [§2.4](#2.4)).

### 3.3.4 – Control Structures

The control structures **if**, **while**, and **repeat** have the usual meaning and familiar syntax:

	stat ::= **while** exp **do** block **end**
	stat ::= **repeat** block **until** exp
	stat ::= **if** exp **then** block {**elseif** exp **then** block} \[**else** block\] **end**

Lua also has a **for** statement, in two flavors (see [§3.3.5](#3.3.5)).

The condition expression of a control structure can return any value. Both **false** and **nil** test false. All values different from **nil** and **false** test true. In particular, the number 0 and the empty string also test true.

In the **repeat**–**until** loop, the inner block does not end at the **until** keyword, but only after the condition. So, the condition can refer to local variables declared inside the loop block.

The **goto** statement transfers the program control to a label. For syntactical reasons, labels in Lua are considered statements too:

	stat ::= **goto** Name
	stat ::= label
	label ::= ‘**::**’ Name ‘**::**’

A label is visible in the entire block where it is defined, except inside nested functions. A goto may jump to any visible label as long as it does not enter into the scope of a local variable. A label should not be declared where a label with the same name is visible, even if this other label has been declared in an enclosing block.

The **break** statement terminates the execution of a **while**, **repeat**, or **for** loop, skipping to the next statement after the loop:

	stat ::= **break**

A **break** ends the innermost enclosing loop.

The **return** statement is used to return values from a function or a chunk (which is handled as an anonymous function). Functions can return more than one value, so the syntax for the **return** statement is

	stat ::= **return** \[explist\] \[‘**;**’\]

The **return** statement can only be written as the last statement of a block. If it is necessary to **return** in the middle of a block, then an explicit inner block can be used, as in the idiom `do return end`, because now **return** is the last statement in its (inner) block.

### 3.3.5 – For Statement

The **for** statement has two forms: one numerical and one generic.

#### The numerical **for** loop

The numerical **for** loop repeats a block of code while a control variable goes through an arithmetic progression. It has the following syntax:

	stat ::= **for** Name ‘**\=**’ exp ‘**,**’ exp \[‘**,**’ exp\] **do** block **end**

The given identifier (Name) defines the control variable, which is a new variable local to the loop body (_block_).

The loop starts by evaluating once the three control expressions. Their values are called respectively the _initial value_, the _limit_, and the _step_. If the step is absent, it defaults to 1.

If both the initial value and the step are integers, the loop is done with integers; note that the limit may not be an integer. Otherwise, the three values are converted to floats and the loop is done with floats. Beware of floating-point accuracy in this case.

After that initialization, the loop body is repeated with the value of the control variable going through an arithmetic progression, starting at the initial value, with a common difference given by the step. A negative step makes a decreasing sequence; a step equal to zero raises an error. The loop continues while the value is less than or equal to the limit (greater than or equal to for a negative step). If the initial value is already greater than the limit (or less than, if the step is negative), the body is not executed.

For integer loops, the control variable never wraps around; instead, the loop ends in case of an overflow.

You should not change the value of the control variable during the loop. If you need its value after the loop, assign it to another variable before exiting the loop.

#### The generic **for** loop

The generic **for** statement works over functions, called _iterators_. On each iteration, the iterator function is called to produce a new value, stopping when this new value is **nil**. The generic **for** loop has the following syntax:

	stat ::= **for** namelist **in** explist **do** block **end**
	namelist ::= Name {‘**,**’ Name}

A **for** statement like

     for _var\_1_, ···, _var\_n_ in _explist_ do _body_ end

works as follows.

The names _var\_i_ declare loop variables local to the loop body. The first of these variables is the _control variable_.

The loop starts by evaluating _explist_ to produce four values: an _iterator function_, a _state_, an initial value for the control variable, and a _closing value_.

Then, at each iteration, Lua calls the iterator function with two arguments: the state and the control variable. The results from this call are then assigned to the loop variables, following the rules of multiple assignments (see [§3.3.3](#3.3.3)). If the control variable becomes **nil**, the loop terminates. Otherwise, the body is executed and the loop goes to the next iteration.

The closing value behaves like a to-be-closed variable (see [§3.3.8](#3.3.8)), which can be used to release resources when the loop ends. Otherwise, it does not interfere with the loop.

You should not change the value of the control variable during the loop.

### 3.3.6 – Function Calls as Statements

To allow possible side-effects, function calls can be executed as statements:

	stat ::= functioncall

In this case, all returned values are thrown away. Function calls are explained in [§3.4.10](#3.4.10).

### 3.3.7 – Local Declarations

Local variables can be declared anywhere inside a block. The declaration can include an initialization:

	stat ::= **local** attnamelist \[‘**\=**’ explist\]
	attnamelist ::=  Name attrib {‘**,**’ Name attrib}

If present, an initial assignment has the same semantics of a multiple assignment (see [§3.3.3](#3.3.3)). Otherwise, all variables are initialized with **nil**.

Each variable name may be postfixed by an attribute (a name between angle brackets):

	attrib ::= \[‘**<**’ Name ‘**\>**’\]

There are two possible attributes: `const`, which declares a constant variable, that is, a variable that cannot be assigned to after its initialization; and `close`, which declares a to-be-closed variable (see [§3.3.8](#3.3.8)). A list of variables can contain at most one to-be-closed variable.

A chunk is also a block (see [§3.3.2](#3.3.2)), and so local variables can be declared in a chunk outside any explicit block.

The visibility rules for local variables are explained in [§3.5](#3.5).

### 3.3.8 – To-be-closed Variables

A to-be-closed variable behaves like a constant local variable, except that its value is _closed_ whenever the variable goes out of scope, including normal block termination, exiting its block by **break**/**goto**/**return**, or exiting by an error.

Here, to _close_ a value means to call its `__close` metamethod. When calling the metamethod, the value itself is passed as the first argument and the error object that caused the exit (if any) is passed as a second argument; if there was no error, the second argument is **nil**.

The value assigned to a to-be-closed variable must have a `__close` metamethod or be a false value. (**nil** and **false** are ignored as to-be-closed values.)

If several to-be-closed variables go out of scope at the same event, they are closed in the reverse order that they were declared.

If there is any error while running a closing method, that error is handled like an error in the regular code where the variable was defined. After an error, the other pending closing methods will still be called.

If a coroutine yields and is never resumed again, some variables may never go out of scope, and therefore they will never be closed. (These variables are the ones created inside the coroutine and in scope at the point where the coroutine yielded.) Similarly, if a coroutine ends with an error, it does not unwind its stack, so it does not close any variable. In both cases, you can either use finalizers or call [`coroutine.close`](#pdf-coroutine.close) to close the variables. However, if the coroutine was created through [`coroutine.wrap`](#pdf-coroutine.wrap), then its corresponding function will close the coroutine in case of errors.

3.4 – Expressions
-----------------

The basic expressions in Lua are the following:

	exp ::= prefixexp
	exp ::= **nil** | **false** | **true**
	exp ::= Numeral
	exp ::= LiteralString
	exp ::= functiondef
	exp ::= tableconstructor
	exp ::= ‘**...**’
	exp ::= exp binop exp
	exp ::= unop exp
	prefixexp ::= var | functioncall | ‘**(**’ exp ‘**)**’

Numerals and literal strings are explained in [§3.1](#3.1); variables are explained in [§3.2](#3.2); function definitions are explained in [§3.4.11](#3.4.11); function calls are explained in [§3.4.10](#3.4.10); table constructors are explained in [§3.4.9](#3.4.9). Vararg expressions, denoted by three dots ('`...`'), can only be used when directly inside a variadic function; they are explained in [§3.4.11](#3.4.11).

Binary operators comprise arithmetic operators (see [§3.4.1](#3.4.1)), bitwise operators (see [§3.4.2](#3.4.2)), relational operators (see [§3.4.4](#3.4.4)), logical operators (see [§3.4.5](#3.4.5)), and the concatenation operator (see [§3.4.6](#3.4.6)). Unary operators comprise the unary minus (see [§3.4.1](#3.4.1)), the unary bitwise NOT (see [§3.4.2](#3.4.2)), the unary logical **not** (see [§3.4.5](#3.4.5)), and the unary _length operator_ (see [§3.4.7](#3.4.7)).

### 3.4.1 – Arithmetic Operators

Lua supports the following arithmetic operators:

*   **`+`:** addition
*   **`-`:** subtraction
*   **`*`:** multiplication
*   **`/`:** float division
*   **`//`:** floor division
*   **`%`:** modulo
*   **`^`:** exponentiation
*   **`-`:** unary minus

With the exception of exponentiation and float division, the arithmetic operators work as follows: If both operands are integers, the operation is performed over integers and the result is an integer. Otherwise, if both operands are numbers, then they are converted to floats, the operation is performed following the machine's rules for floating-point arithmetic (usually the IEEE 754 standard), and the result is a float. (The string library coerces strings to numbers in arithmetic operations; see [§3.4.3](#3.4.3) for details.)

Exponentiation and float division (`/`) always convert their operands to floats and the result is always a float. Exponentiation uses the ISO C function `pow`, so that it works for non-integer exponents too.

Floor division (`//`) is a division that rounds the quotient towards minus infinity, resulting in the floor of the division of its operands.

Modulo is defined as the remainder of a division that rounds the quotient towards minus infinity (floor division).

In case of overflows in integer arithmetic, all operations _wrap around_.

### 3.4.2 – Bitwise Operators

Lua supports the following bitwise operators:

*   **`&`:** bitwise AND
*   **`|`:** bitwise OR
*   **`~`:** bitwise exclusive OR
*   **`>>`:** right shift
*   **`<<`:** left shift
*   **`~`:** unary bitwise NOT

All bitwise operations convert its operands to integers (see [§3.4.3](#3.4.3)), operate on all bits of those integers, and result in an integer.

Both right and left shifts fill the vacant bits with zeros. Negative displacements shift to the other direction; displacements with absolute values equal to or higher than the number of bits in an integer result in zero (as all bits are shifted out).

### 3.4.3 – Coercions and Conversions

Lua provides some automatic conversions between some types and representations at run time. Bitwise operators always convert float operands to integers. Exponentiation and float division always convert integer operands to floats. All other arithmetic operations applied to mixed numbers (integers and floats) convert the integer operand to a float. The C API also converts both integers to floats and floats to integers, as needed. Moreover, string concatenation accepts numbers as arguments, besides strings.

In a conversion from integer to float, if the integer value has an exact representation as a float, that is the result. Otherwise, the conversion gets the nearest higher or the nearest lower representable value. This kind of conversion never fails.

The conversion from float to integer checks whether the float has an exact representation as an integer (that is, the float has an integral value and it is in the range of integer representation). If it does, that representation is the result. Otherwise, the conversion fails.

Several places in Lua coerce strings to numbers when necessary. In particular, the string library sets metamethods that try to coerce strings to numbers in all arithmetic operations. If the conversion fails, the library calls the metamethod of the other operand (if present) or it raises an error. Note that bitwise operators do not do this coercion.

It is always a good practice not to rely on the implicit coercions from strings to numbers, as they are not always applied; in particular, `"1"==1` is false and `"1"<1` raises an error (see [§3.4.4](#3.4.4)). These coercions exist mainly for compatibility and may be removed in future versions of the language.

A string is converted to an integer or a float following its syntax and the rules of the Lua lexer. The string may have also leading and trailing whitespaces and a sign. All conversions from strings to numbers accept both a dot and the current locale mark as the radix character. (The Lua lexer, however, accepts only a dot.) If the string is not a valid numeral, the conversion fails. If necessary, the result of this first step is then converted to a specific number subtype following the previous rules for conversions between floats and integers.

The conversion from numbers to strings uses a non-specified human-readable format. To convert numbers to strings in any specific way, use the function [`string.format`](#pdf-string.format).

### 3.4.4 – Relational Operators

Lua supports the following relational operators:

*   **`==`:** equality
*   **`~=`:** inequality
*   **`<`:** less than
*   **`>`:** greater than
*   **`<=`:** less or equal
*   **`>=`:** greater or equal

These operators always result in **false** or **true**.

Equality (`==`) first compares the type of its operands. If the types are different, then the result is **false**. Otherwise, the values of the operands are compared. Strings are equal if they have the same byte content. Numbers are equal if they denote the same mathematical value.

Tables, userdata, and threads are compared by reference: two objects are considered equal only if they are the same object. Every time you create a new object (a table, a userdata, or a thread), this new object is different from any previously existing object. A function is always equal to itself. Functions with any detectable difference (different behavior, different definition) are always different. Functions created at different times but with no detectable differences may be classified as equal or not (depending on internal caching details).

You can change the way that Lua compares tables and userdata by using the `__eq` metamethod (see [§2.4](#2.4)).

Equality comparisons do not convert strings to numbers or vice versa. Thus, `"0"==0` evaluates to **false**, and `t[0]` and `t["0"]` denote different entries in a table.

The operator `~=` is exactly the negation of equality (`==`).

The order operators work as follows. If both arguments are numbers, then they are compared according to their mathematical values, regardless of their subtypes. Otherwise, if both arguments are strings, then their values are compared according to the current locale. Otherwise, Lua tries to call the `__lt` or the `__le` metamethod (see [§2.4](#2.4)). A comparison `a > b` is translated to `b < a` and `a >= b` is translated to `b <= a`.

Following the IEEE 754 standard, the special value NaN is considered neither less than, nor equal to, nor greater than any value, including itself.

### 3.4.5 – Logical Operators

The logical operators in Lua are **and**, **or**, and **not**. Like the control structures (see [§3.3.4](#3.3.4)), all logical operators consider both **false** and **nil** as false and anything else as true.

The negation operator **not** always returns **false** or **true**. The conjunction operator **and** returns its first argument if this value is **false** or **nil**; otherwise, **and** returns its second argument. The disjunction operator **or** returns its first argument if this value is different from **nil** and **false**; otherwise, **or** returns its second argument. Both **and** and **or** use short-circuit evaluation; that is, the second operand is evaluated only if necessary. Here are some examples:

     10 or 20            --> 10
     10 or error()       --> 10
     nil or "a"          --> "a"
     nil and 10          --> nil
     false and error()   --> false
     false and nil       --> false
     false or nil        --> nil
     10 and 20           --> 20

### 3.4.6 – Concatenation

The string concatenation operator in Lua is denoted by two dots ('`..`'). If both operands are strings or numbers, then the numbers are converted to strings in a non-specified format (see [§3.4.3](#3.4.3)). Otherwise, the `__concat` metamethod is called (see [§2.4](#2.4)).

### 3.4.7 – The Length Operator

The length operator is denoted by the unary prefix operator `#`.

The length of a string is its number of bytes. (That is the usual meaning of string length when each character is one byte.)

The length operator applied on a table returns a border in that table. A _border_ in a table `t` is any non-negative integer that satisfies the following condition:

     (border == 0 or t\[border\] ~= nil) and
     (t\[border + 1\] == nil or border == math.maxinteger)

In words, a border is any positive integer index present in the table that is followed by an absent index, plus two limit cases: zero, when index 1 is absent; and the maximum value for an integer, when that index is present. Note that keys that are not positive integers do not interfere with borders.

A table with exactly one border is called a _sequence_. For instance, the table `{10, 20, 30, 40, 50}` is a sequence, as it has only one border (5). The table `{10, 20, 30, nil, 50}` has two borders (3 and 5), and therefore it is not a sequence. (The **nil** at index 4 is called a _hole_.) The table `{nil, 20, 30, nil, nil, 60, nil}` has three borders (0, 3, and 6), so it is not a sequence, too. The table `{}` is a sequence with border 0.

When `t` is a sequence, `#t` returns its only border, which corresponds to the intuitive notion of the length of the sequence. When `t` is not a sequence, `#t` can return any of its borders. (The exact one depends on details of the internal representation of the table, which in turn can depend on how the table was populated and the memory addresses of its non-numeric keys.)

The computation of the length of a table has a guaranteed worst time of _O(log n)_, where _n_ is the largest integer key in the table.

A program can modify the behavior of the length operator for any value but strings through the `__len` metamethod (see [§2.4](#2.4)).

### 3.4.8 – Precedence

Operator precedence in Lua follows the table below, from lower to higher priority:

     or
     and
     <     >     <=    >=    ~=    ==
     |
     ~
     &
     <<    >>
     ..
     +     -
     \*     /     //    %
     unary operators (not   #     -     ~)
     ^

As usual, you can use parentheses to change the precedences of an expression. The concatenation ('`..`') and exponentiation ('`^`') operators are right associative. All other binary operators are left associative.

### 3.4.9 – Table Constructors

Table constructors are expressions that create tables. Every time a constructor is evaluated, a new table is created. A constructor can be used to create an empty table or to create a table and initialize some of its fields. The general syntax for constructors is

	tableconstructor ::= ‘**{**’ \[fieldlist\] ‘**}**’
	fieldlist ::= field {fieldsep field} \[fieldsep\]
	field ::= ‘**\[**’ exp ‘**\]**’ ‘**\=**’ exp | Name ‘**\=**’ exp | exp
	fieldsep ::= ‘**,**’ | ‘**;**’

Each field of the form `[exp1] = exp2` adds to the new table an entry with key `exp1` and value `exp2`. A field of the form `name = exp` is equivalent to `["name"] = exp`. Fields of the form `exp` are equivalent to `[i] = exp`, where `i` are consecutive integers starting with 1; fields in the other formats do not affect this counting. For example,

     a = { \[f(1)\] = g; "x", "y"; x = 1, f(x), \[30\] = 23; 45 }

is equivalent to

     do
       local t = {}
       t\[f(1)\] = g
       t\[1\] = "x"         -- 1st exp
       t\[2\] = "y"         -- 2nd exp
       t.x = 1            -- t\["x"\] = 1
       t\[3\] = f(x)        -- 3rd exp
       t\[30\] = 23
       t\[4\] = 45          -- 4th exp
       a = t
     end

The order of the assignments in a constructor is undefined. (This order would be relevant only when there are repeated keys.)

If the last field in the list has the form `exp` and the expression is a multires expression, then all values returned by this expression enter the list consecutively (see [§3.4.12](#3.4.12)).

The field list can have an optional trailing separator, as a convenience for machine-generated code.

### 3.4.10 – Function Calls

A function call in Lua has the following syntax:

	functioncall ::= prefixexp args

In a function call, first prefixexp and args are evaluated. If the value of prefixexp has type _function_, then this function is called with the given arguments. Otherwise, if present, the prefixexp `__call` metamethod is called: its first argument is the value of prefixexp, followed by the original call arguments (see [§2.4](#2.4)).

The form

	functioncall ::= prefixexp ‘**:**’ Name args

can be used to emulate methods. A call `v:name(_args_)` is syntactic sugar for `v.name(v,_args_)`, except that `v` is evaluated only once.

Arguments have the following syntax:

	args ::= ‘**(**’ \[explist\] ‘**)**’
	args ::= tableconstructor
	args ::= LiteralString

All argument expressions are evaluated before the call. A call of the form `f{_fields_}` is syntactic sugar for `f({_fields_})`; that is, the argument list is a single new table. A call of the form `f'_string_'` (or `f"_string_"` or `f[[_string_]]`) is syntactic sugar for `f('_string_')`; that is, the argument list is a single literal string.

A call of the form `return _functioncall_` not in the scope of a to-be-closed variable is called a _tail call_. Lua implements _proper tail calls_ (or _proper tail recursion_): In a tail call, the called function reuses the stack entry of the calling function. Therefore, there is no limit on the number of nested tail calls that a program can execute. However, a tail call erases any debug information about the calling function. Note that a tail call only happens with a particular syntax, where the **return** has one single function call as argument, and it is outside the scope of any to-be-closed variable. This syntax makes the calling function return exactly the returns of the called function, without any intervening action. So, none of the following examples are tail calls:

     return (f(x))        -- results adjusted to 1
     return 2 \* f(x)      -- result multiplied by 2
     return x, f(x)       -- additional results
     f(x); return         -- results discarded
     return x or f(x)     -- results adjusted to 1

### 3.4.11 – Function Definitions

The syntax for function definition is

	functiondef ::= **function** funcbody
	funcbody ::= ‘**(**’ \[parlist\] ‘**)**’ block **end**

The following syntactic sugar simplifies function definitions:

	stat ::= **function** funcname funcbody
	stat ::= **local** **function** Name funcbody
	funcname ::= Name {‘**.**’ Name} \[‘**:**’ Name\]

The statement

     function f () _body_ end

translates to

     f = function () _body_ end

The statement

     function t.a.b.c.f () _body_ end

translates to

     t.a.b.c.f = function () _body_ end

The statement

     local function f () _body_ end

translates to

     local f; f = function () _body_ end

not to

     local f = function () _body_ end

(This only makes a difference when the body of the function contains references to `f`.)

A function definition is an executable expression, whose value has type _function_. When Lua precompiles a chunk, all its function bodies are precompiled too, but they are not created yet. Then, whenever Lua executes the function definition, the function is _instantiated_ (or _closed_). This function instance, or _closure_, is the final value of the expression.

Parameters act as local variables that are initialized with the argument values:

	parlist ::= namelist \[‘**,**’ ‘**...**’\] | ‘**...**’

When a Lua function is called, it adjusts its list of arguments to the length of its list of parameters (see [§3.4.12](#3.4.12)), unless the function is a _variadic function_, which is indicated by three dots ('`...`') at the end of its parameter list. A variadic function does not adjust its argument list; instead, it collects all extra arguments and supplies them to the function through a _vararg expression_, which is also written as three dots. The value of this expression is a list of all actual extra arguments, similar to a function with multiple results (see [§3.4.12](#3.4.12)).

As an example, consider the following definitions:

     function f(a, b) end
     function g(a, b, ...) end
     function r() return 1,2,3 end

Then, we have the following mapping from arguments to parameters and to the vararg expression:

     CALL             PARAMETERS
     
     f(3)             a=3, b=nil
     f(3, 4)          a=3, b=4
     f(3, 4, 5)       a=3, b=4
     f(r(), 10)       a=1, b=10
     f(r())           a=1, b=2
     
     g(3)             a=3, b=nil, ... -->  (nothing)
     g(3, 4)          a=3, b=4,   ... -->  (nothing)
     g(3, 4, 5, 8)    a=3, b=4,   ... -->  5  8
     g(5, r())        a=5, b=1,   ... -->  2  3

Results are returned using the **return** statement (see [§3.3.4](#3.3.4)). If control reaches the end of a function without encountering a **return** statement, then the function returns with no results.

There is a system-dependent limit on the number of values that a function may return. This limit is guaranteed to be greater than 1000.

The _colon_ syntax is used to emulate _methods_, adding an implicit extra parameter `self` to the function. Thus, the statement

     function t.a.b.c:f (_params_) _body_ end

is syntactic sugar for

     t.a.b.c.f = function (self, _params_) _body_ end

### 3.4.12 – Lists of expressions, multiple results, and adjustment

Both function calls and vararg expressions can result in multiple values. These expressions are called _multires expressions_.

When a multires expression is used as the last element of a list of expressions, all results from the expression are added to the list of values produced by the list of expressions. Note that a single expression in a place that expects a list of expressions is the last expression in that (singleton) list.

These are the places where Lua expects a list of expressions:

*   A **return** statement, for instance `return e1, e2, e3` (see [§3.3.4](#3.3.4)).
*   A table constructor, for instance `{e1, e2, e3}` (see [§3.4.9](#3.4.9)).
*   The arguments of a function call, for instance `foo(e1, e2, e3)` (see [§3.4.10](#3.4.10)).
*   A multiple assignment, for instance `a , b, c = e1, e2, e3` (see [§3.3.3](#3.3.3)).
*   A local declaration, for instance `local a , b, c = e1, e2, e3` (see [§3.3.7](#3.3.7)).
*   The initial values in a generic **for** loop, for instance `for k in e1, e2, e3 do ... end` (see [§3.3.5](#3.3.5)).

In the last four cases, the list of values from the list of expressions must be _adjusted_ to a specific length: the number of parameters in a call to a non-variadic function (see [§3.4.11](#3.4.11)), the number of variables in a multiple assignment or a local declaration, and exactly four values for a generic **for** loop. The _adjustment_ follows these rules: If there are more values than needed, the extra values are thrown away; if there are fewer values than needed, the list is extended with **nil**'s. When the list of expressions ends with a multires expression, all results from that expression enter the list of values before the adjustment.

When a multires expression is used in a list of expressions without being the last element, or in a place where the syntax expects a single expression, Lua adjusts the result list of that expression to one element. As a particular case, the syntax expects a single expression inside a parenthesized expression; therefore, adding parentheses around a multires expression forces it to produce exactly one result.

We seldom need to use a vararg expression in a place where the syntax expects a single expression. (Usually it is simpler to add a regular parameter before the variadic part and use that parameter.) When there is such a need, we recommend assigning the vararg expression to a single variable and using that variable in its place.

Here are some examples of uses of mutlres expressions. In all cases, when the construction needs "the n-th result" and there is no such result, it uses a **nil**.

     print(x, f())      -- prints x and all results from f().
     print(x, (f()))    -- prints x and the first result from f().
     print(f(), x)      -- prints the first result from f() and x.
     print(1 + f())     -- prints 1 added to the first result from f().
     local x = ...      -- x gets the first vararg argument.
     x,y = ...          -- x gets the first vararg argument,
                        -- y gets the second vararg argument.
     x,y,z = w, f()     -- x gets w, y gets the first result from f(),
                        -- z gets the second result from f().
     x,y,z = f()        -- x gets the first result from f(),
                        -- y gets the second result from f(),
                        -- z gets the third result from f().
     x,y,z = f(), g()   -- x gets the first result from f(),
                        -- y gets the first result from g(),
                        -- z gets the second result from g().
     x,y,z = (f())      -- x gets the first result from f(), y and z get nil.
     return f()         -- returns all results from f().
     return x, ...      -- returns x and all received vararg arguments.
     return x,y,f()     -- returns x, y, and all results from f().
     {f()}              -- creates a list with all results from f().
     {...}              -- creates a list with all vararg arguments.
     {f(), 5}           -- creates a list with the first result from f() and 5.

3.5 – Visibility Rules
----------------------

Lua is a lexically scoped language. The scope of a local variable begins at the first statement after its declaration and lasts until the last non-void statement of the innermost block that includes the declaration. (_Void statements_ are labels and empty statements.) Consider the following example:

     x = 10                -- global variable
     do                    -- new block
       local x = x         -- new 'x', with value 10
       print(x)            --> 10
       x = x+1
       do                  -- another block
         local x = x+1     -- another 'x'
         print(x)          --> 12
       end
       print(x)            --> 11
     end
     print(x)              --> 10  (the global one)

Notice that, in a declaration like `local x = x`, the new `x` being declared is not in scope yet, and so the second `x` refers to the outside variable.

Because of the lexical scoping rules, local variables can be freely accessed by functions defined inside their scope. A local variable used by an inner function is called an _upvalue_ (or _external local variable_, or simply _external variable_) inside the inner function.

Notice that each execution of a **local** statement defines new local variables. Consider the following example:

     a = {}
     local x = 20
     for i = 1, 10 do
       local y = 0
       a\[i\] = function () y = y + 1; return x + y end
     end

The loop creates ten closures (that is, ten instances of the anonymous function). Each of these closures uses a different `y` variable, while all of them share the same `x`.

4 – The Standard Libraries
==========================

The standard Lua libraries provide useful functions that are implemented in C through the C API. Some of these functions provide essential services to the language (e.g., [`type`](#pdf-type) and [`getmetatable`](#pdf-getmetatable)); others provide access to outside services (e.g., I/O); and others could be implemented in Lua itself, but that for different reasons deserve an implementation in C (e.g., [`table.sort`](#pdf-table.sort)).

All libraries are implemented through the official C API and are provided as separate C modules. Unless otherwise noted, these library functions do not adjust its number of arguments to its expected parameters. For instance, a function documented as `foo(arg)` should not be called without an argument.

The notation **fail** means a false value representing some kind of failure. (Currently, **fail** is equal to **nil**, but that may change in future versions. The recommendation is to always test the success of these functions with `(not status)`, instead of `(status == nil)`.)

Currently, Lua has the following standard libraries:

*   basic library ([§4.1](#4.1));
*   coroutine library ([§4.2](#4.2));
*   package library ([§4.3](#4.3));
*   string manipulation ([§4.4](#4.4));
*   basic UTF-8 support ([§4.5](#4.5));
*   table manipulation ([§4.6](#4.6));
*   mathematical functions ([§4.7](#4.7)) (sin, log, etc.);
*   input and output ([§4.8](#4.8));
*   operating system facilities ([§4.9](#4.9));
*   debug facilities ([§4.10](#4.10)).

Except for the basic and the package libraries, each library provides all its functions as fields of a global table or as methods of its objects.

To have access to these libraries, the C host program should call the [`luaL_openlibs`](#luaL_openlibs) function, which opens all standard libraries. Alternatively, the host program can open them individually by using [`luaL_requiref`](#luaL_requiref) to call `luaopen_base` (for the basic library), `luaopen_package` (for the package library), `luaopen_coroutine` (for the coroutine library), `luaopen_string` (for the string library), `luaopen_utf8` (for the UTF-8 library), `luaopen_table` (for the table library), `luaopen_math` (for the mathematical library), `luaopen_io` (for the I/O library), `luaopen_os` (for the operating system library), and `luaopen_debug` (for the debug library). These functions are declared in `lualib.h`.

4.1 – Basic Functions
---------------------

The basic library provides core functions to Lua. If you do not include this library in your application, you should check carefully whether you need to provide implementations for some of its facilities.

* * *

### `assert (v [, message])`

Raises an error if the value of its argument `v` is false (i.e., **nil** or **false**); otherwise, returns all its arguments. In case of error, `message` is the error object; when absent, it defaults to "`assertion failed!`"

* * *

### `collectgarbage ([opt [, arg]])`

This function is a generic interface to the garbage collector. It performs different functions according to its first argument, `opt`:

*   **"`collect`":** Performs a full garbage-collection cycle. This is the default option.
*   **"`stop`":** Stops automatic execution of the garbage collector. The collector will run only when explicitly invoked, until a call to restart it.
*   **"`restart`":** Restarts automatic execution of the garbage collector.
*   **"`count`":** Returns the total memory in use by Lua in Kbytes. The value has a fractional part, so that it multiplied by 1024 gives the exact number of bytes in use by Lua.
*   **"`step`":** Performs a garbage-collection step. The step "size" is controlled by `arg`. With a zero value, the collector will perform one basic (indivisible) step. For non-zero values, the collector will perform as if that amount of memory (in Kbytes) had been allocated by Lua. Returns **true** if the step finished a collection cycle.
*   **"`isrunning`":** Returns a boolean that tells whether the collector is running (i.e., not stopped).
*   **"`incremental`":** Change the collector mode to incremental. This option can be followed by three numbers: the garbage-collector pause, the step multiplier, and the step size (see [§2.5.1](#2.5.1)). A zero means to not change that value.
*   **"`generational`":** Change the collector mode to generational. This option can be followed by two numbers: the garbage-collector minor multiplier and the major multiplier (see [§2.5.2](#2.5.2)). A zero means to not change that value.

See [§2.5](#2.5) for more details about garbage collection and some of these options.

This function should not be called by a finalizer.

* * *

### `dofile ([filename])`

Opens the named file and executes its content as a Lua chunk. When called without arguments, `dofile` executes the content of the standard input (`stdin`). Returns all values returned by the chunk. In case of errors, `dofile` propagates the error to its caller. (That is, `dofile` does not run in protected mode.)

* * *

### `error (message [, level])`

Raises an error (see [§2.3](#2.3)) with `message` as the error object. This function never returns.

Usually, `error` adds some information about the error position at the beginning of the message, if the message is a string. The `level` argument specifies how to get the error position. With level 1 (the default), the error position is where the `error` function was called. Level 2 points the error to where the function that called `error` was called; and so on. Passing a level 0 avoids the addition of error position information to the message.

* * *

### `_G`

A global variable (not a function) that holds the global environment (see [§2.2](#2.2)). Lua itself does not use this variable; changing its value does not affect any environment, nor vice versa.

* * *

### `getmetatable (object)`

If `object` does not have a metatable, returns **nil**. Otherwise, if the object's metatable has a `__metatable` field, returns the associated value. Otherwise, returns the metatable of the given object.

* * *

### `ipairs (t)`

Returns three values (an iterator function, the table `t`, and 0) so that the construction

     for i,v in ipairs(t) do _body_ end

will iterate over the key–value pairs (`1,t[1]`), (`2,t[2]`), ..., up to the first absent index.

* * *

### `load (chunk [, chunkname [, mode [, env]]])`

Loads a chunk.

If `chunk` is a string, the chunk is this string. If `chunk` is a function, `load` calls it repeatedly to get the chunk pieces. Each call to `chunk` must return a string that concatenates with previous results. A return of an empty string, **nil**, or no value signals the end of the chunk.

If there are no syntactic errors, `load` returns the compiled chunk as a function; otherwise, it returns **fail** plus the error message.

When you load a main chunk, the resulting function will always have exactly one upvalue, the `_ENV` variable (see [§2.2](#2.2)). However, when you load a binary chunk created from a function (see [`string.dump`](#pdf-string.dump)), the resulting function can have an arbitrary number of upvalues, and there is no guarantee that its first upvalue will be the `_ENV` variable. (A non-main function may not even have an `_ENV` upvalue.)

Regardless, if the resulting function has any upvalues, its first upvalue is set to the value of `env`, if that parameter is given, or to the value of the global environment. Other upvalues are initialized with **nil**. All upvalues are fresh, that is, they are not shared with any other function.

`chunkname` is used as the name of the chunk for error messages and debug information. When absent, it defaults to `chunk`, if `chunk` is a string, or to "`=(load)`" otherwise.

The string `mode` controls whether the chunk can be text or binary (that is, a precompiled chunk). It may be the string "`b`" (only binary chunks), "`t`" (only text chunks), or "`bt`" (both binary and text). The default is "`bt`".

It is safe to load malformed binary chunks; `load` signals an appropriate error. However, Lua does not check the consistency of the code inside binary chunks; running maliciously crafted bytecode can crash the interpreter.

* * *

### `loadfile ([filename [, mode [, env]]])`

Similar to [`load`](#pdf-load), but gets the chunk from file `filename` or from the standard input, if no file name is given.

* * *

### `next (table [, index])`

Allows a program to traverse all fields of a table. Its first argument is a table and its second argument is an index in this table. A call to `next` returns the next index of the table and its associated value. When called with **nil** as its second argument, `next` returns an initial index and its associated value. When called with the last index, or with **nil** in an empty table, `next` returns **nil**. If the second argument is absent, then it is interpreted as **nil**. In particular, you can use `next(t)` to check whether a table is empty.

The order in which the indices are enumerated is not specified, _even for numeric indices_. (To traverse a table in numerical order, use a numerical **for**.)

You should not assign any value to a non-existent field in a table during its traversal. You may however modify existing fields. In particular, you may set existing fields to nil.

* * *

### `pairs (t)`

If `t` has a metamethod `__pairs`, calls it with `t` as argument and returns the first three results from the call.

Otherwise, returns three values: the [`next`](#pdf-next) function, the table `t`, and **nil**, so that the construction

     for k,v in pairs(t) do _body_ end

will iterate over all key–value pairs of table `t`.

See function [`next`](#pdf-next) for the caveats of modifying the table during its traversal.

* * *

### `pcall (f [, arg1, ···])`

Calls the function `f` with the given arguments in _protected mode_. This means that any error inside `f` is not propagated; instead, `pcall` catches the error and returns a status code. Its first result is the status code (a boolean), which is **true** if the call succeeds without errors. In such case, `pcall` also returns all results from the call, after this first result. In case of any error, `pcall` returns **false** plus the error object. Note that errors caught by `pcall` do not call a message handler.

* * *

### `print (···)`

Receives any number of arguments and prints their values to `stdout`, converting each argument to a string following the same rules of [`tostring`](#pdf-tostring).

The function `print` is not intended for formatted output, but only as a quick way to show a value, for instance for debugging. For complete control over the output, use [`string.format`](#pdf-string.format) and [`io.write`](#pdf-io.write).

* * *

### `rawequal (v1, v2)`

Checks whether `v1` is equal to `v2`, without invoking the `__eq` metamethod. Returns a boolean.

* * *

### `rawget (table, index)`

Gets the real value of `table[index]`, without using the `__index` metavalue. `table` must be a table; `index` may be any value.

* * *

### `rawlen (v)`

Returns the length of the object `v`, which must be a table or a string, without invoking the `__len` metamethod. Returns an integer.

* * *

### `rawset (table, index, value)`

Sets the real value of `table[index]` to `value`, without using the `__newindex` metavalue. `table` must be a table, `index` any value different from **nil** and NaN, and `value` any Lua value.

This function returns `table`.

* * *

### `select (index, ···)`

If `index` is a number, returns all arguments after argument number `index`; a negative number indexes from the end (-1 is the last argument). Otherwise, `index` must be the string `"#"`, and `select` returns the total number of extra arguments it received.

* * *

### `setmetatable (table, metatable)`

Sets the metatable for the given table. If `metatable` is **nil**, removes the metatable of the given table. If the original metatable has a `__metatable` field, raises an error.

This function returns `table`.

To change the metatable of other types from Lua code, you must use the debug library ([§4.10](#4.10)).

* * *

### `tonumber (e [, base])`

When called with no `base`, `tonumber` tries to convert its argument to a number. If the argument is already a number or a string convertible to a number, then `tonumber` returns this number; otherwise, it returns **fail**.

The conversion of strings can result in integers or floats, according to the lexical conventions of Lua (see [§3.1](#3.1)). The string may have leading and trailing spaces and a sign.

When called with `base`, then `e` must be a string to be interpreted as an integer numeral in that base. The base may be any integer between 2 and 36, inclusive. In bases above 10, the letter '`A`' (in either upper or lower case) represents 10, '`B`' represents 11, and so forth, with '`Z`' representing 35. If the string `e` is not a valid numeral in the given base, the function returns **fail**.

* * *

### `tostring (v)`

Receives a value of any type and converts it to a string in a human-readable format.

If the metatable of `v` has a `__tostring` field, then `tostring` calls the corresponding value with `v` as argument, and uses the result of the call as its result. Otherwise, if the metatable of `v` has a `__name` field with a string value, `tostring` may use that string in its final result.

For complete control of how numbers are converted, use [`string.format`](#pdf-string.format).

* * *

### `type (v)`

Returns the type of its only argument, coded as a string. The possible results of this function are "`nil`" (a string, not the value **nil**), "`number`", "`string`", "`boolean`", "`table`", "`function`", "`thread`", and "`userdata`".

* * *

### `_VERSION`

A global variable (not a function) that holds a string containing the running Lua version. The current value of this variable is "`Lua 5.4`".

* * *

### `warn (msg1, ···)`

Emits a warning with a message composed by the concatenation of all its arguments (which should be strings).

By convention, a one-piece message starting with '`@`' is intended to be a _control message_, which is a message to the warning system itself. In particular, the standard warning function in Lua recognizes the control messages "`@off`", to stop the emission of warnings, and "`@on`", to (re)start the emission; it ignores unknown control messages.

* * *

### `xpcall (f, msgh [, arg1, ···])`

This function is similar to [`pcall`](#pdf-pcall), except that it sets a new message handler `msgh`.

4.2 – Coroutine Manipulation
----------------------------

This library comprises the operations to manipulate coroutines, which come inside the table `coroutine`. See [§2.6](#2.6) for a general description of coroutines.

* * *

### `coroutine.close (co)`

Closes coroutine `co`, that is, closes all its pending to-be-closed variables and puts the coroutine in a dead state. The given coroutine must be dead or suspended. In case of error (either the original error that stopped the coroutine or errors in closing methods), returns **false** plus the error object; otherwise returns **true**.

* * *

### `coroutine.create (f)`

Creates a new coroutine, with body `f`. `f` must be a function. Returns this new coroutine, an object with type `"thread"`.

* * *

### `coroutine.isyieldable ([co])`

Returns **true** when the coroutine `co` can yield. The default for `co` is the running coroutine.

A coroutine is yieldable if it is not the main thread and it is not inside a non-yieldable C function.

* * *

### `coroutine.resume (co [, val1, ···])`

Starts or continues the execution of coroutine `co`. The first time you resume a coroutine, it starts running its body. The values `val1`, ... are passed as the arguments to the body function. If the coroutine has yielded, `resume` restarts it; the values `val1`, ... are passed as the results from the yield.

If the coroutine runs without any errors, `resume` returns **true** plus any values passed to `yield` (when the coroutine yields) or any values returned by the body function (when the coroutine terminates). If there is any error, `resume` returns **false** plus the error message.

* * *

### `coroutine.running ()`

Returns the running coroutine plus a boolean, **true** when the running coroutine is the main one.

* * *

### `coroutine.status (co)`

Returns the status of the coroutine `co`, as a string: `"running"`, if the coroutine is running (that is, it is the one that called `status`); `"suspended"`, if the coroutine is suspended in a call to `yield`, or if it has not started running yet; `"normal"` if the coroutine is active but not running (that is, it has resumed another coroutine); and `"dead"` if the coroutine has finished its body function, or if it has stopped with an error.

* * *

### `coroutine.wrap (f)`

Creates a new coroutine, with body `f`; `f` must be a function. Returns a function that resumes the coroutine each time it is called. Any arguments passed to this function behave as the extra arguments to `resume`. The function returns the same values returned by `resume`, except the first boolean. In case of error, the function closes the coroutine and propagates the error.

* * *

### `coroutine.yield (···)`

Suspends the execution of the calling coroutine. Any arguments to `yield` are passed as extra results to `resume`.

4.3 – Modules
-------------

The package library provides basic facilities for loading modules in Lua. It exports one function directly in the global environment: [`require`](#pdf-require). Everything else is exported in the table `package`.

* * *

### `require (modname)`

Loads the given module. The function starts by looking into the [`package.loaded`](#pdf-package.loaded) table to determine whether `modname` is already loaded. If it is, then `require` returns the value stored at `package.loaded[modname]`. (The absence of a second result in this case signals that this call did not have to load the module.) Otherwise, it tries to find a _loader_ for the module.

To find a loader, `require` is guided by the table [`package.searchers`](#pdf-package.searchers). Each item in this table is a search function, that searches for the module in a particular way. By changing this table, we can change how `require` looks for a module. The following explanation is based on the default configuration for [`package.searchers`](#pdf-package.searchers).

First `require` queries `package.preload[modname]`. If it has a value, this value (which must be a function) is the loader. Otherwise `require` searches for a Lua loader using the path stored in [`package.path`](#pdf-package.path). If that also fails, it searches for a C loader using the path stored in [`package.cpath`](#pdf-package.cpath). If that also fails, it tries an _all-in-one_ loader (see [`package.searchers`](#pdf-package.searchers)).

Once a loader is found, `require` calls the loader with two arguments: `modname` and an extra value, a _loader data_, also returned by the searcher. The loader data can be any value useful to the module; for the default searchers, it indicates where the loader was found. (For instance, if the loader came from a file, this extra value is the file path.) If the loader returns any non-nil value, `require` assigns the returned value to `package.loaded[modname]`. If the loader does not return a non-nil value and has not assigned any value to `package.loaded[modname]`, then `require` assigns **true** to this entry. In any case, `require` returns the final value of `package.loaded[modname]`. Besides that value, `require` also returns as a second result the loader data returned by the searcher, which indicates how `require` found the module.

If there is any error loading or running the module, or if it cannot find any loader for the module, then `require` raises an error.

* * *

### `package.config`

A string describing some compile-time configurations for packages. This string is a sequence of lines:

*   The first line is the directory separator string. Default is '`\`' for Windows and '`/`' for all other systems.
*   The second line is the character that separates templates in a path. Default is '`;`'.
*   The third line is the string that marks the substitution points in a template. Default is '`?`'.
*   The fourth line is a string that, in a path in Windows, is replaced by the executable's directory. Default is '`!`'.
*   The fifth line is a mark to ignore all text after it when building the `luaopen_` function name. Default is '`-`'.

* * *

### `package.cpath`

A string with the path used by [`require`](#pdf-require) to search for a C loader.

Lua initializes the C path [`package.cpath`](#pdf-package.cpath) in the same way it initializes the Lua path [`package.path`](#pdf-package.path), using the environment variable `LUA_CPATH_5_4`, or the environment variable `LUA_CPATH`, or a default path defined in `luaconf.h`.

* * *

### `package.loaded`

A table used by [`require`](#pdf-require) to control which modules are already loaded. When you require a module `modname` and `package.loaded[modname]` is not false, [`require`](#pdf-require) simply returns the value stored there.

This variable is only a reference to the real table; assignments to this variable do not change the table used by [`require`](#pdf-require). The real table is stored in the C registry, indexed by the key `LUA_LOADED_TABLE`, a string.

* * *

### `package.loadlib (libname, funcname)`

Dynamically links the host program with the C library `libname`.

If `funcname` is "`*`", then it only links with the library, making the symbols exported by the library available to other dynamically linked libraries. Otherwise, it looks for a function `funcname` inside the library and returns this function as a C function. So, `funcname` must follow the [`lua_CFunction`](#lua_CFunction) prototype (see [`lua_CFunction`](#lua_CFunction)).

This is a low-level function. It completely bypasses the package and module system. Unlike [`require`](#pdf-require), it does not perform any path searching and does not automatically adds extensions. `libname` must be the complete file name of the C library, including if necessary a path and an extension. `funcname` must be the exact name exported by the C library (which may depend on the C compiler and linker used).

This functionality is not supported by ISO C. As such, it is only available on some platforms (Windows, Linux, Mac OS X, Solaris, BSD, plus other Unix systems that support the `dlfcn` standard).

This function is inherently insecure, as it allows Lua to call any function in any readable dynamic library in the system. (Lua calls any function assuming the function has a proper prototype and respects a proper protocol (see [`lua_CFunction`](#lua_CFunction)). Therefore, calling an arbitrary function in an arbitrary dynamic library more often than not results in an access violation.)

* * *

### `package.path`

A string with the path used by [`require`](#pdf-require) to search for a Lua loader.

At start-up, Lua initializes this variable with the value of the environment variable `LUA_PATH_5_4` or the environment variable `LUA_PATH` or with a default path defined in `luaconf.h`, if those environment variables are not defined. A "`;;`" in the value of the environment variable is replaced by the default path.

* * *

### `package.preload`

A table to store loaders for specific modules (see [`require`](#pdf-require)).

This variable is only a reference to the real table; assignments to this variable do not change the table used by [`require`](#pdf-require). The real table is stored in the C registry, indexed by the key `LUA_PRELOAD_TABLE`, a string.

* * *

### `package.searchers`

A table used by [`require`](#pdf-require) to control how to find modules.

Each entry in this table is a _searcher function_. When looking for a module, [`require`](#pdf-require) calls each of these searchers in ascending order, with the module name (the argument given to [`require`](#pdf-require)) as its sole argument. If the searcher finds the module, it returns another function, the module _loader_, plus an extra value, a _loader data_, that will be passed to that loader and returned as a second result by [`require`](#pdf-require). If it cannot find the module, it returns a string explaining why (or **nil** if it has nothing to say).

Lua initializes this table with four searcher functions.

The first searcher simply looks for a loader in the [`package.preload`](#pdf-package.preload) table.

The second searcher looks for a loader as a Lua library, using the path stored at [`package.path`](#pdf-package.path). The search is done as described in function [`package.searchpath`](#pdf-package.searchpath).

The third searcher looks for a loader as a C library, using the path given by the variable [`package.cpath`](#pdf-package.cpath). Again, the search is done as described in function [`package.searchpath`](#pdf-package.searchpath). For instance, if the C path is the string

     "./?.so;./?.dll;/usr/local/?/init.so"

the searcher for module `foo` will try to open the files `./foo.so`, `./foo.dll`, and `/usr/local/foo/init.so`, in that order. Once it finds a C library, this searcher first uses a dynamic link facility to link the application with the library. Then it tries to find a C function inside the library to be used as the loader. The name of this C function is the string "`luaopen_`" concatenated with a copy of the module name where each dot is replaced by an underscore. Moreover, if the module name has a hyphen, its suffix after (and including) the first hyphen is removed. For instance, if the module name is `a.b.c-v2.1`, the function name will be `luaopen_a_b_c`.

The fourth searcher tries an _all-in-one loader_. It searches the C path for a library for the root name of the given module. For instance, when requiring `a.b.c`, it will search for a C library for `a`. If found, it looks into it for an open function for the submodule; in our example, that would be `luaopen_a_b_c`. With this facility, a package can pack several C submodules into one single library, with each submodule keeping its original open function.

All searchers except the first one (preload) return as the extra value the file path where the module was found, as returned by [`package.searchpath`](#pdf-package.searchpath). The first searcher always returns the string "`:preload:`".

Searchers should raise no errors and have no side effects in Lua. (They may have side effects in C, for instance by linking the application with a library.)

* * *

### `package.searchpath (name, path [, sep [, rep]])`

Searches for the given `name` in the given `path`.

A path is a string containing a sequence of _templates_ separated by semicolons. For each template, the function replaces each interrogation mark (if any) in the template with a copy of `name` wherein all occurrences of `sep` (a dot, by default) were replaced by `rep` (the system's directory separator, by default), and then tries to open the resulting file name.

For instance, if the path is the string

     "./?.lua;./?.lc;/usr/local/?/init.lua"

the search for the name `foo.a` will try to open the files `./foo/a.lua`, `./foo/a.lc`, and `/usr/local/foo/a/init.lua`, in that order.

Returns the resulting name of the first file that it can open in read mode (after closing the file), or **fail** plus an error message if none succeeds. (This error message lists all file names it tried to open.)

4.4 – String Manipulation
-------------------------

This library provides generic functions for string manipulation, such as finding and extracting substrings, and pattern matching. When indexing a string in Lua, the first character is at position 1 (not at 0, as in C). Indices are allowed to be negative and are interpreted as indexing backwards, from the end of the string. Thus, the last character is at position -1, and so on.

The string library provides all its functions inside the table `string`. It also sets a metatable for strings where the `__index` field points to the `string` table. Therefore, you can use the string functions in object-oriented style. For instance, `string.byte(s,i)` can be written as `s:byte(i)`.

The string library assumes one-byte character encodings.

* * *

### `string.byte (s [, i [, j]])`

Returns the internal numeric codes of the characters `s[i]`, `s[i+1]`, ..., `s[j]`. The default value for `i` is 1; the default value for `j` is `i`. These indices are corrected following the same rules of function [`string.sub`](#pdf-string.sub).

Numeric codes are not necessarily portable across platforms.

* * *

### `string.char (···)`

Receives zero or more integers. Returns a string with length equal to the number of arguments, in which each character has the internal numeric code equal to its corresponding argument.

Numeric codes are not necessarily portable across platforms.

* * *

### `string.dump (function [, strip])`

Returns a string containing a binary representation (a _binary chunk_) of the given function, so that a later [`load`](#pdf-load) on this string returns a copy of the function (but with new upvalues). If `strip` is a true value, the binary representation may not include all debug information about the function, to save space.

Functions with upvalues have only their number of upvalues saved. When (re)loaded, those upvalues receive fresh instances. (See the [`load`](#pdf-load) function for details about how these upvalues are initialized. You can use the debug library to serialize and reload the upvalues of a function in a way adequate to your needs.)

* * *

### `string.find (s, pattern [, init [, plain]])`

Looks for the first match of `pattern` (see [§4.4.1](#4.4.1)) in the string `s`. If it finds a match, then `find` returns the indices of `s` where this occurrence starts and ends; otherwise, it returns **fail**. A third, optional numeric argument `init` specifies where to start the search; its default value is 1 and can be negative. A **true** as a fourth, optional argument `plain` turns off the pattern matching facilities, so the function does a plain "find substring" operation, with no characters in `pattern` being considered magic.

If the pattern has captures, then in a successful match the captured values are also returned, after the two indices.

* * *

### `string.format (formatstring, ···)`

Returns a formatted version of its variable number of arguments following the description given in its first argument, which must be a string. The format string follows the same rules as the ISO C function `sprintf`. The only differences are that the conversion specifiers and modifiers `F`, `n`, `*`, `h`, `L`, and `l` are not supported and that there is an extra specifier, `q`. Both width and precision, when present, are limited to two digits.

The specifier `q` formats booleans, nil, numbers, and strings in a way that the result is a valid constant in Lua source code. Booleans and nil are written in the obvious way (`true`, `false`, `nil`). Floats are written in hexadecimal, to preserve full precision. A string is written between double quotes, using escape sequences when necessary to ensure that it can safely be read back by the Lua interpreter. For instance, the call

     string.format('%q', 'a string with "quotes" and \\n new line')

may produce the string:

     "a string with \\"quotes\\" and \\
      new line"

This specifier does not support modifiers (flags, width, precision).

The conversion specifiers `A`, `a`, `E`, `e`, `f`, `G`, and `g` all expect a number as argument. The specifiers `c`, `d`, `i`, `o`, `u`, `X`, and `x` expect an integer. When Lua is compiled with a C89 compiler, the specifiers `A` and `a` (hexadecimal floats) do not support modifiers.

The specifier `s` expects a string; if its argument is not a string, it is converted to one following the same rules of [`tostring`](#pdf-tostring). If the specifier has any modifier, the corresponding string argument should not contain embedded zeros.

The specifier `p` formats the pointer returned by [`lua_topointer`](#lua_topointer). That gives a unique string identifier for tables, userdata, threads, strings, and functions. For other values (numbers, nil, booleans), this specifier results in a string representing the pointer `NULL`.

* * *

### `string.gmatch (s, pattern [, init])`

Returns an iterator function that, each time it is called, returns the next captures from `pattern` (see [§4.4.1](#4.4.1)) over the string `s`. If `pattern` specifies no captures, then the whole match is produced in each call. A third, optional numeric argument `init` specifies where to start the search; its default value is 1 and can be negative.

As an example, the following loop will iterate over all the words from string `s`, printing one per line:

     s = "hello world from Lua"
     for w in string.gmatch(s, "%a+") do
       print(w)
     end

The next example collects all pairs `key=value` from the given string into a table:

     t = {}
     s = "from=world, to=Lua"
     for k, v in string.gmatch(s, "(%w+)=(%w+)") do
       t\[k\] = v
     end

For this function, a caret '`^`' at the start of a pattern does not work as an anchor, as this would prevent the iteration.

* * *

### `string.gsub (s, pattern, repl [, n])`

Returns a copy of `s` in which all (or the first `n`, if given) occurrences of the `pattern` (see [§4.4.1](#4.4.1)) have been replaced by a replacement string specified by `repl`, which can be a string, a table, or a function. `gsub` also returns, as its second value, the total number of matches that occurred. The name `gsub` comes from _Global SUBstitution_.

If `repl` is a string, then its value is used for replacement. The character `%` works as an escape character: any sequence in `repl` of the form `%_d_`, with _d_ between 1 and 9, stands for the value of the _d_\-th captured substring; the sequence `%0` stands for the whole match; the sequence `%%` stands for a single `%`.

If `repl` is a table, then the table is queried for every match, using the first capture as the key.

If `repl` is a function, then this function is called every time a match occurs, with all captured substrings passed as arguments, in order.

In any case, if the pattern specifies no captures, then it behaves as if the whole pattern was inside a capture.

If the value returned by the table query or by the function call is a string or a number, then it is used as the replacement string; otherwise, if it is **false** or **nil**, then there is no replacement (that is, the original match is kept in the string).

Here are some examples:

     x = string.gsub("hello world", "(%w+)", "%1 %1")
     --> x="hello hello world world"
     
     x = string.gsub("hello world", "%w+", "%0 %0", 1)
     --> x="hello hello world"
     
     x = string.gsub("hello world from Lua", "(%w+)%s\*(%w+)", "%2 %1")
     --> x="world hello Lua from"
     
     x = string.gsub("home = $HOME, user = $USER", "%$(%w+)", os.getenv)
     --> x="home = /home/roberto, user = roberto"
     
     x = string.gsub("4+5 = $return 4+5$", "%$(.-)%$", function (s)
           return load(s)()
         end)
     --> x="4+5 = 9"
     
     local t = {name="lua", version="5.4"}
     x = string.gsub("$name-$version.tar.gz", "%$(%w+)", t)
     --> x="lua-5.4.tar.gz"

* * *

### `string.len (s)`

Receives a string and returns its length. The empty string `""` has length 0. Embedded zeros are counted, so `"a\000bc\000"` has length 5.

* * *

### `string.lower (s)`

Receives a string and returns a copy of this string with all uppercase letters changed to lowercase. All other characters are left unchanged. The definition of what an uppercase letter is depends on the current locale.

* * *

### `string.match (s, pattern [, init])`

Looks for the first _match_ of the `pattern` (see [§4.4.1](#4.4.1)) in the string `s`. If it finds one, then `match` returns the captures from the pattern; otherwise it returns **fail**. If `pattern` specifies no captures, then the whole match is returned. A third, optional numeric argument `init` specifies where to start the search; its default value is 1 and can be negative.

* * *

### `string.pack (fmt, v1, v2, ···)`

Returns a binary string containing the values `v1`, `v2`, etc. serialized in binary form (packed) according to the format string `fmt` (see [§4.4.2](#4.4.2)).

* * *

### `string.packsize (fmt)`

Returns the length of a string resulting from [`string.pack`](#pdf-string.pack) with the given format. The format string cannot have the variable-length options '`s`' or '`z`' (see [§4.4.2](#4.4.2)).

* * *

### `string.rep (s, n [, sep])`

Returns a string that is the concatenation of `n` copies of the string `s` separated by the string `sep`. The default value for `sep` is the empty string (that is, no separator). Returns the empty string if `n` is not positive.

(Note that it is very easy to exhaust the memory of your machine with a single call to this function.)

* * *

### `string.reverse (s)`

Returns a string that is the string `s` reversed.

* * *

### `string.sub (s, i [, j])`

Returns the substring of `s` that starts at `i` and continues until `j`; `i` and `j` can be negative. If `j` is absent, then it is assumed to be equal to -1 (which is the same as the string length). In particular, the call `string.sub(s,1,j)` returns a prefix of `s` with length `j`, and `string.sub(s, -i)` (for a positive `i`) returns a suffix of `s` with length `i`.

If, after the translation of negative indices, `i` is less than 1, it is corrected to 1. If `j` is greater than the string length, it is corrected to that length. If, after these corrections, `i` is greater than `j`, the function returns the empty string.

* * *

### `string.unpack (fmt, s [, pos])`

Returns the values packed in string `s` (see [`string.pack`](#pdf-string.pack)) according to the format string `fmt` (see [§4.4.2](#4.4.2)). An optional `pos` marks where to start reading in `s` (default is 1). After the read values, this function also returns the index of the first unread byte in `s`.

* * *

### `string.upper (s)`

Receives a string and returns a copy of this string with all lowercase letters changed to uppercase. All other characters are left unchanged. The definition of what a lowercase letter is depends on the current locale.

### 4.4.1 – Patterns

Patterns in Lua are described by regular strings, which are interpreted as patterns by the pattern-matching functions [`string.find`](#pdf-string.find), [`string.gmatch`](#pdf-string.gmatch), [`string.gsub`](#pdf-string.gsub), and [`string.match`](#pdf-string.match). This section describes the syntax and the meaning (that is, what they match) of these strings.

#### Character Class:

A _character class_ is used to represent a set of characters. The following combinations are allowed in describing a character class:

*   **_x_:** (where _x_ is not one of the _magic characters_ `^$()%.[]*+-?`) represents the character _x_ itself.
*   **`.`:** (a dot) represents all characters.
*   **`%a`:** represents all letters.
*   **`%c`:** represents all control characters.
*   **`%d`:** represents all digits.
*   **`%g`:** represents all printable characters except space.
*   **`%l`:** represents all lowercase letters.
*   **`%p`:** represents all punctuation characters.
*   **`%s`:** represents all space characters.
*   **`%u`:** represents all uppercase letters.
*   **`%w`:** represents all alphanumeric characters.
*   **`%x`:** represents all hexadecimal digits.
*   **`%_x_`:** (where _x_ is any non-alphanumeric character) represents the character _x_. This is the standard way to escape the magic characters. Any non-alphanumeric character (including all punctuation characters, even the non-magical) can be preceded by a '`%`' to represent itself in a pattern.
*   **`[_set_]`:** represents the class which is the union of all characters in _set_. A range of characters can be specified by separating the end characters of the range, in ascending order, with a '`-`'. All classes `%`_x_ described above can also be used as components in _set_. All other characters in _set_ represent themselves. For example, `[%w_]` (or `[_%w]`) represents all alphanumeric characters plus the underscore, `[0-7]` represents the octal digits, and `[0-7%l%-]` represents the octal digits plus the lowercase letters plus the '`-`' character.
    
    You can put a closing square bracket in a set by positioning it as the first character in the set. You can put a hyphen in a set by positioning it as the first or the last character in the set. (You can also use an escape for both cases.)
    
    The interaction between ranges and classes is not defined. Therefore, patterns like `[%a-z]` or `[a-%%]` have no meaning.
    
*   **`[^_set_]`:** represents the complement of _set_, where _set_ is interpreted as above.

For all classes represented by single letters (`%a`, `%c`, etc.), the corresponding uppercase letter represents the complement of the class. For instance, `%S` represents all non-space characters.

The definitions of letter, space, and other character groups depend on the current locale. In particular, the class `[a-z]` may not be equivalent to `%l`.

#### Pattern Item:

A _pattern item_ can be

*   a single character class, which matches any single character in the class;
*   a single character class followed by '`*`', which matches sequences of zero or more characters in the class. These repetition items will always match the longest possible sequence;
*   a single character class followed by '`+`', which matches sequences of one or more characters in the class. These repetition items will always match the longest possible sequence;
*   a single character class followed by '`-`', which also matches sequences of zero or more characters in the class. Unlike '`*`', these repetition items will always match the shortest possible sequence;
*   a single character class followed by '`?`', which matches zero or one occurrence of a character in the class. It always matches one occurrence if possible;
*   `%_n_`, for _n_ between 1 and 9; such item matches a substring equal to the _n_\-th captured string (see below);
*   `%b_xy_`, where _x_ and _y_ are two distinct characters; such item matches strings that start with _x_, end with _y_, and where the _x_ and _y_ are _balanced_. This means that, if one reads the string from left to right, counting _+1_ for an _x_ and _\-1_ for a _y_, the ending _y_ is the first _y_ where the count reaches 0. For instance, the item `%b()` matches expressions with balanced parentheses.
*   `%f[_set_]`, a _frontier pattern_; such item matches an empty string at any position such that the next character belongs to _set_ and the previous character does not belong to _set_. The set _set_ is interpreted as previously described. The beginning and the end of the subject are handled as if they were the character '`\0`'.

#### Pattern:

A _pattern_ is a sequence of pattern items. A caret '`^`' at the beginning of a pattern anchors the match at the beginning of the subject string. A '`$`' at the end of a pattern anchors the match at the end of the subject string. At other positions, '`^`' and '`$`' have no special meaning and represent themselves.

#### Captures:

A pattern can contain sub-patterns enclosed in parentheses; they describe _captures_. When a match succeeds, the substrings of the subject string that match captures are stored (_captured_) for future use. Captures are numbered according to their left parentheses. For instance, in the pattern `"(a*(.)%w(%s*))"`, the part of the string matching `"a*(.)%w(%s*)"` is stored as the first capture, and therefore has number 1; the character matching "`.`" is captured with number 2, and the part matching "`%s*`" has number 3.

As a special case, the capture `()` captures the current string position (a number). For instance, if we apply the pattern `"()aa()"` on the string `"flaaap"`, there will be two captures: 3 and 5.

#### Multiple matches:

The function [`string.gsub`](#pdf-string.gsub) and the iterator [`string.gmatch`](#pdf-string.gmatch) match multiple occurrences of the given pattern in the subject. For these functions, a new match is considered valid only if it ends at least one byte after the end of the previous match. In other words, the pattern machine never accepts the empty string as a match immediately after another match. As an example, consider the results of the following code:

     > string.gsub("abc", "()a\*()", print);
     --> 1   2
     --> 3   3
     --> 4   4

The second and third results come from Lua matching an empty string after '`b`' and another one after '`c`'. Lua does not match an empty string after '`a`', because it would end at the same position of the previous match.

### 4.4.2 – Format Strings for Pack and Unpack

The first argument to [`string.pack`](#pdf-string.pack), [`string.packsize`](#pdf-string.packsize), and [`string.unpack`](#pdf-string.unpack) is a format string, which describes the layout of the structure being created or read.

A format string is a sequence of conversion options. The conversion options are as follows:

*   **`<`:** sets little endian
*   **`>`:** sets big endian
*   **`=`:** sets native endian
*   **`![_n_]`:** sets maximum alignment to `n` (default is native alignment)
*   **`b`:** a signed byte (`char`)
*   **`B`:** an unsigned byte (`char`)
*   **`h`:** a signed `short` (native size)
*   **`H`:** an unsigned `short` (native size)
*   **`l`:** a signed `long` (native size)
*   **`L`:** an unsigned `long` (native size)
*   **`j`:** a `lua_Integer`
*   **`J`:** a `lua_Unsigned`
*   **`T`:** a `size_t` (native size)
*   **`i[_n_]`:** a signed `int` with `n` bytes (default is native size)
*   **`I[_n_]`:** an unsigned `int` with `n` bytes (default is native size)
*   **`f`:** a `float` (native size)
*   **`d`:** a `double` (native size)
*   **`n`:** a `lua_Number`
*   **`c_n_`:** a fixed-sized string with `n` bytes
*   **`z`:** a zero-terminated string
*   **`s[_n_]`:** a string preceded by its length coded as an unsigned integer with `n` bytes (default is a `size_t`)
*   **`x`:** one byte of padding
*   **`X_op_`:** an empty item that aligns according to option `op` (which is otherwise ignored)
*   **' ':** (space) ignored

(A "`[_n_]`" means an optional integral numeral.) Except for padding, spaces, and configurations (options "`xX <=>!`"), each option corresponds to an argument in [`string.pack`](#pdf-string.pack) or a result in [`string.unpack`](#pdf-string.unpack).

For options "`!_n_`", "`s_n_`", "`i_n_`", and "`I_n_`", `n` can be any integer between 1 and 16. All integral options check overflows; [`string.pack`](#pdf-string.pack) checks whether the given value fits in the given size; [`string.unpack`](#pdf-string.unpack) checks whether the read value fits in a Lua integer. For the unsigned options, Lua integers are treated as unsigned values too.

Any format string starts as if prefixed by "`!1=`", that is, with maximum alignment of 1 (no alignment) and native endianness.

Native endianness assumes that the whole system is either big or little endian. The packing functions will not emulate correctly the behavior of mixed-endian formats.

Alignment works as follows: For each option, the format gets extra padding until the data starts at an offset that is a multiple of the minimum between the option size and the maximum alignment; this minimum must be a power of 2. Options "`c`" and "`z`" are not aligned; option "`s`" follows the alignment of its starting integer.

All padding is filled with zeros by [`string.pack`](#pdf-string.pack) and ignored by [`string.unpack`](#pdf-string.unpack).

4.5 – UTF-8 Support
-------------------

This library provides basic support for UTF-8 encoding. It provides all its functions inside the table `utf8`. This library does not provide any support for Unicode other than the handling of the encoding. Any operation that needs the meaning of a character, such as character classification, is outside its scope.

Unless stated otherwise, all functions that expect a byte position as a parameter assume that the given position is either the start of a byte sequence or one plus the length of the subject string. As in the string library, negative indices count from the end of the string.

Functions that create byte sequences accept all values up to `0x7FFFFFFF`, as defined in the original UTF-8 specification; that implies byte sequences of up to six bytes.

Functions that interpret byte sequences only accept valid sequences (well formed and not overlong). By default, they only accept byte sequences that result in valid Unicode code points, rejecting values greater than `10FFFF` and surrogates. A boolean argument `lax`, when available, lifts these checks, so that all values up to `0x7FFFFFFF` are accepted. (Not well formed and overlong sequences are still rejected.)

* * *

### `utf8.char (···)`

Receives zero or more integers, converts each one to its corresponding UTF-8 byte sequence and returns a string with the concatenation of all these sequences.

* * *

### `utf8.charpattern`

The pattern (a string, not a function) "`[\0-\x7F\xC2-\xFD][\x80-\xBF]*`" (see [§4.4.1](#4.4.1)), which matches exactly one UTF-8 byte sequence, assuming that the subject is a valid UTF-8 string.

* * *

### `utf8.codes (s [, lax])`

Returns values so that the construction

     for p, c in utf8.codes(s) do _body_ end

will iterate over all UTF-8 characters in string `s`, with `p` being the position (in bytes) and `c` the code point of each character. It raises an error if it meets any invalid byte sequence.

* * *

### `utf8.codepoint (s [, i [, j [, lax]]])`

Returns the code points (as integers) from all characters in `s` that start between byte position `i` and `j` (both included). The default for `i` is 1 and for `j` is `i`. It raises an error if it meets any invalid byte sequence.

* * *

### `utf8.len (s [, i [, j [, lax]]])`

Returns the number of UTF-8 characters in string `s` that start between positions `i` and `j` (both inclusive). The default for `i` is 1 and for `j` is -1. If it finds any invalid byte sequence, returns **fail** plus the position of the first invalid byte.

* * *

### `utf8.offset (s, n [, i])`

Returns the position (in bytes) where the encoding of the `n`\-th character of `s` (counting from position `i`) starts. A negative `n` gets characters before position `i`. The default for `i` is 1 when `n` is non-negative and `#s + 1` otherwise, so that `utf8.offset(s, -n)` gets the offset of the `n`\-th character from the end of the string. If the specified character is neither in the subject nor right after its end, the function returns **fail**.

As a special case, when `n` is 0 the function returns the start of the encoding of the character that contains the `i`\-th byte of `s`.

This function assumes that `s` is a valid UTF-8 string.

4.6 – Table Manipulation
------------------------

This library provides generic functions for table manipulation. It provides all its functions inside the table `table`.

Remember that, whenever an operation needs the length of a table, all caveats about the length operator apply (see [§3.4.7](#3.4.7)). All functions ignore non-numeric keys in the tables given as arguments.

* * *

### `table.concat (list [, sep [, i [, j]]])`

Given a list where all elements are strings or numbers, returns the string `list[i]..sep..list[i+1] ··· sep..list[j]`. The default value for `sep` is the empty string, the default for `i` is 1, and the default for `j` is `#list`. If `i` is greater than `j`, returns the empty string.

* * *

### `table.insert (list, [pos,] value)`

Inserts element `value` at position `pos` in `list`, shifting up the elements `list[pos], list[pos+1], ···, list[#list]`. The default value for `pos` is `#list+1`, so that a call `table.insert(t,x)` inserts `x` at the end of the list `t`.

* * *

### `table.move (a1, f, e, t [,a2])`

Moves elements from the table `a1` to the table `a2`, performing the equivalent to the following multiple assignment: `a2[t],··· = a1[f],···,a1[e]`. The default for `a2` is `a1`. The destination range can overlap with the source range. The number of elements to be moved must fit in a Lua integer.

Returns the destination table `a2`.

* * *

### `table.pack (···)`

Returns a new table with all arguments stored into keys 1, 2, etc. and with a field "`n`" with the total number of arguments. Note that the resulting table may not be a sequence, if some arguments are **nil**.

* * *

### `table.remove (list [, pos])`

Removes from `list` the element at position `pos`, returning the value of the removed element. When `pos` is an integer between 1 and `#list`, it shifts down the elements `list[pos+1], list[pos+2], ···, list[#list]` and erases element `list[#list]`; The index `pos` can also be 0 when `#list` is 0, or `#list + 1`.

The default value for `pos` is `#list`, so that a call `table.remove(l)` removes the last element of the list `l`.

* * *

### `table.sort (list [, comp])`

Sorts the list elements in a given order, _in-place_, from `list[1]` to `list[#list]`. If `comp` is given, then it must be a function that receives two list elements and returns true when the first element must come before the second in the final order, so that, after the sort, `i <= j` implies `not comp(list[j],list[i])`. If `comp` is not given, then the standard Lua operator `<` is used instead.

The `comp` function must define a consistent order; more formally, the function must define a strict weak order. (A weak order is similar to a total order, but it can equate different elements for comparison purposes.)

The sort algorithm is not stable: Different elements considered equal by the given order may have their relative positions changed by the sort.

* * *

### `table.unpack (list [, i [, j]])`

Returns the elements from the given list. This function is equivalent to

     return list\[i\], list\[i+1\], ···, list\[j\]

By default, `i` is 1 and `j` is `#list`.

4.7 – Mathematical Functions
----------------------------

This library provides basic mathematical functions. It provides all its functions and constants inside the table `math`. Functions with the annotation "`integer/float`" give integer results for integer arguments and float results for non-integer arguments. The rounding functions [`math.ceil`](#pdf-math.ceil), [`math.floor`](#pdf-math.floor), and [`math.modf`](#pdf-math.modf) return an integer when the result fits in the range of an integer, or a float otherwise.

* * *

### `math.abs (x)`

Returns the maximum value between `x` and `-x`. (integer/float)

* * *

### `math.acos (x)`

Returns the arc cosine of `x` (in radians).

* * *

### `math.asin (x)`

Returns the arc sine of `x` (in radians).

* * *

### `math.atan (y [, x])`

Returns the arc tangent of `y/x` (in radians), using the signs of both arguments to find the quadrant of the result. It also handles correctly the case of `x` being zero.

The default value for `x` is 1, so that the call `math.atan(y)` returns the arc tangent of `y`.

* * *

### `math.ceil (x)`

Returns the smallest integral value greater than or equal to `x`.

* * *

### `math.cos (x)`

Returns the cosine of `x` (assumed to be in radians).

* * *

### `math.deg (x)`

Converts the angle `x` from radians to degrees.

* * *

### `math.exp (x)`

Returns the value _ex_ (where `e` is the base of natural logarithms).

* * *

### `math.floor (x)`

Returns the largest integral value less than or equal to `x`.

* * *

### `math.fmod (x, y)`

Returns the remainder of the division of `x` by `y` that rounds the quotient towards zero. (integer/float)

* * *

### `math.huge`

The float value `HUGE_VAL`, a value greater than any other numeric value.

* * *

### `math.log (x [, base])`

Returns the logarithm of `x` in the given base. The default for `base` is _e_ (so that the function returns the natural logarithm of `x`).

* * *

### `math.max (x, ···)`

Returns the argument with the maximum value, according to the Lua operator `<`.

* * *

### `math.maxinteger`

An integer with the maximum value for an integer.

* * *

### `math.min (x, ···)`

Returns the argument with the minimum value, according to the Lua operator `<`.

* * *

### `math.mininteger`

An integer with the minimum value for an integer.

* * *

### `math.modf (x)`

Returns the integral part of `x` and the fractional part of `x`. Its second result is always a float.

* * *

### `math.pi`

The value of _π_.

* * *

### `math.rad (x)`

Converts the angle `x` from degrees to radians.

* * *

### `math.random ([m [, n]])`

When called without arguments, returns a pseudo-random float with uniform distribution in the range _\[0,1)_. When called with two integers `m` and `n`, `math.random` returns a pseudo-random integer with uniform distribution in the range _\[m, n\]_. The call `math.random(n)`, for a positive `n`, is equivalent to `math.random(1,n)`. The call `math.random(0)` produces an integer with all bits (pseudo)random.

This function uses the `xoshiro256**` algorithm to produce pseudo-random 64-bit integers, which are the results of calls with argument 0. Other results (ranges and floats) are unbiased extracted from these integers.

Lua initializes its pseudo-random generator with the equivalent of a call to [`math.randomseed`](#pdf-math.randomseed) with no arguments, so that `math.random` should generate different sequences of results each time the program runs.

* * *

### `math.randomseed ([x [, y]])`

When called with at least one argument, the integer parameters `x` and `y` are joined into a 128-bit _seed_ that is used to reinitialize the pseudo-random generator; equal seeds produce equal sequences of numbers. The default for `y` is zero.

When called with no arguments, Lua generates a seed with a weak attempt for randomness.

This function returns the two seed components that were effectively used, so that setting them again repeats the sequence.

To ensure a required level of randomness to the initial state (or contrarily, to have a deterministic sequence, for instance when debugging a program), you should call [`math.randomseed`](#pdf-math.randomseed) with explicit arguments.

* * *

### `math.sin (x)`

Returns the sine of `x` (assumed to be in radians).

* * *

### `math.sqrt (x)`

Returns the square root of `x`. (You can also use the expression `x^0.5` to compute this value.)

* * *

### `math.tan (x)`

Returns the tangent of `x` (assumed to be in radians).

* * *

### `math.tointeger (x)`

If the value `x` is convertible to an integer, returns that integer. Otherwise, returns **fail**.

* * *

### `math.type (x)`

Returns "`integer`" if `x` is an integer, "`float`" if it is a float, or **fail** if `x` is not a number.

* * *

### `math.ult (m, n)`

Returns a boolean, **true** if and only if integer `m` is below integer `n` when they are compared as unsigned integers.

4.8 – Input and Output Facilities
---------------------------------

The I/O library provides two different styles for file manipulation. The first one uses implicit file handles; that is, there are operations to set a default input file and a default output file, and all input/output operations are done over these default files. The second style uses explicit file handles.

When using implicit file handles, all operations are supplied by table `io`. When using explicit file handles, the operation [`io.open`](#pdf-io.open) returns a file handle and then all operations are supplied as methods of the file handle.

The metatable for file handles provides metamethods for `__gc` and `__close` that try to close the file when called.

The table `io` also provides three predefined file handles with their usual meanings from C: `io.stdin`, `io.stdout`, and `io.stderr`. The I/O library never closes these files.

Unless otherwise stated, all I/O functions return **fail** on failure, plus an error message as a second result and a system-dependent error code as a third result, and some non-false value on success. On non-POSIX systems, the computation of the error message and error code in case of errors may be not thread safe, because they rely on the global C variable `errno`.

* * *

### `io.close ([file])`

Equivalent to `file:close()`. Without a `file`, closes the default output file.

* * *

### `io.flush ()`

Equivalent to `io.output():flush()`.

* * *

### `io.input ([file])`

When called with a file name, it opens the named file (in text mode), and sets its handle as the default input file. When called with a file handle, it simply sets this file handle as the default input file. When called without arguments, it returns the current default input file.

In case of errors this function raises the error, instead of returning an error code.

* * *

### `io.lines ([filename, ···])`

Opens the given file name in read mode and returns an iterator function that works like `file:lines(···)` over the opened file. When the iterator function fails to read any value, it automatically closes the file. Besides the iterator function, `io.lines` returns three other values: two **nil** values as placeholders, plus the created file handle. Therefore, when used in a generic **for** loop, the file is closed also if the loop is interrupted by an error or a **break**.

The call `io.lines()` (with no file name) is equivalent to `io.input():lines("l")`; that is, it iterates over the lines of the default input file. In this case, the iterator does not close the file when the loop ends.

In case of errors opening the file, this function raises the error, instead of returning an error code.

* * *

### `io.open (filename [, mode])`

This function opens a file, in the mode specified in the string `mode`. In case of success, it returns a new file handle.

The `mode` string can be any of the following:

*   **"`r`":** read mode (the default);
*   **"`w`":** write mode;
*   **"`a`":** append mode;
*   **"`r+`":** update mode, all previous data is preserved;
*   **"`w+`":** update mode, all previous data is erased;
*   **"`a+`":** append update mode, previous data is preserved, writing is only allowed at the end of file.

The `mode` string can also have a '`b`' at the end, which is needed in some systems to open the file in binary mode.

* * *

### `io.output ([file])`

Similar to [`io.input`](#pdf-io.input), but operates over the default output file.

* * *

### `io.popen (prog [, mode])`

This function is system dependent and is not available on all platforms.

Starts the program `prog` in a separated process and returns a file handle that you can use to read data from this program (if `mode` is `"r"`, the default) or to write data to this program (if `mode` is `"w"`).

* * *

### `io.read (···)`

Equivalent to `io.input():read(···)`.

* * *

### `io.tmpfile ()`

In case of success, returns a handle for a temporary file. This file is opened in update mode and it is automatically removed when the program ends.

* * *

### `io.type (obj)`

Checks whether `obj` is a valid file handle. Returns the string `"file"` if `obj` is an open file handle, `"closed file"` if `obj` is a closed file handle, or **fail** if `obj` is not a file handle.

* * *

### `io.write (···)`

Equivalent to `io.output():write(···)`.

* * *

### `file:close ()`

Closes `file`. Note that files are automatically closed when their handles are garbage collected, but that takes an unpredictable amount of time to happen.

When closing a file handle created with [`io.popen`](#pdf-io.popen), [`file:close`](#pdf-file:close) returns the same values returned by [`os.execute`](#pdf-os.execute).

* * *

### `file:flush ()`

Saves any written data to `file`.

* * *

### `file:lines (···)`

Returns an iterator function that, each time it is called, reads the file according to the given formats. When no format is given, uses "`l`" as a default. As an example, the construction

     for c in file:lines(1) do _body_ end

will iterate over all characters of the file, starting at the current position. Unlike [`io.lines`](#pdf-io.lines), this function does not close the file when the loop ends.

* * *

### `file:read (···)`

Reads the file `file`, according to the given formats, which specify what to read. For each format, the function returns a string or a number with the characters read, or **fail** if it cannot read data with the specified format. (In this latter case, the function does not read subsequent formats.) When called without arguments, it uses a default format that reads the next line (see below).

The available formats are

*   **"`n`":** reads a numeral and returns it as a float or an integer, following the lexical conventions of Lua. (The numeral may have leading whitespaces and a sign.) This format always reads the longest input sequence that is a valid prefix for a numeral; if that prefix does not form a valid numeral (e.g., an empty string, "`0x`", or "`3.4e-`") or it is too long (more than 200 characters), it is discarded and the format returns **fail**.
*   **"`a`":** reads the whole file, starting at the current position. On end of file, it returns the empty string; this format never fails.
*   **"`l`":** reads the next line skipping the end of line, returning **fail** on end of file. This is the default format.
*   **"`L`":** reads the next line keeping the end-of-line character (if present), returning **fail** on end of file.
*   **_number_:** reads a string with up to this number of bytes, returning **fail** on end of file. If `number` is zero, it reads nothing and returns an empty string, or **fail** on end of file.

The formats "`l`" and "`L`" should be used only for text files.

* * *

### `file:seek ([whence [, offset]])`

Sets and gets the file position, measured from the beginning of the file, to the position given by `offset` plus a base specified by the string `whence`, as follows:

*   **"`set`":** base is position 0 (beginning of the file);
*   **"`cur`":** base is current position;
*   **"`end`":** base is end of file;

In case of success, `seek` returns the final file position, measured in bytes from the beginning of the file. If `seek` fails, it returns **fail**, plus a string describing the error.

The default value for `whence` is `"cur"`, and for `offset` is 0. Therefore, the call `file:seek()` returns the current file position, without changing it; the call `file:seek("set")` sets the position to the beginning of the file (and returns 0); and the call `file:seek("end")` sets the position to the end of the file, and returns its size.

* * *

### `file:setvbuf (mode [, size])`

Sets the buffering mode for a file. There are three available modes:

*   **"`no`":** no buffering.
*   **"`full`":** full buffering.
*   **"`line`":** line buffering.

For the last two cases, `size` is a hint for the size of the buffer, in bytes. The default is an appropriate size.

The specific behavior of each mode is non portable; check the underlying ISO C function `setvbuf` in your platform for more details.

* * *

### `file:write (···)`

Writes the value of each of its arguments to `file`. The arguments must be strings or numbers.

In case of success, this function returns `file`.

4.9 – Operating System Facilities
---------------------------------

This library is implemented through table `os`.

* * *

### `os.clock ()`

Returns an approximation of the amount in seconds of CPU time used by the program, as returned by the underlying ISO C function `clock`.

* * *

### `os.date ([format [, time]])`

Returns a string or a table containing date and time, formatted according to the given string `format`.

If the `time` argument is present, this is the time to be formatted (see the [`os.time`](#pdf-os.time) function for a description of this value). Otherwise, `date` formats the current time.

If `format` starts with '`!`', then the date is formatted in Coordinated Universal Time. After this optional character, if `format` is the string "`*t`", then `date` returns a table with the following fields: `year`, `month` (1–12), `day` (1–31), `hour` (0–23), `min` (0–59), `sec` (0–61, due to leap seconds), `wday` (weekday, 1–7, Sunday is 1), `yday` (day of the year, 1–366), and `isdst` (daylight saving flag, a boolean). This last field may be absent if the information is not available.

If `format` is not "`*t`", then `date` returns the date as a string, formatted according to the same rules as the ISO C function `strftime`.

If `format` is absent, it defaults to "`%c`", which gives a human-readable date and time representation using the current locale.

On non-POSIX systems, this function may be not thread safe because of its reliance on C function `gmtime` and C function `localtime`.

* * *

### `os.difftime (t2, t1)`

Returns the difference, in seconds, from time `t1` to time `t2` (where the times are values returned by [`os.time`](#pdf-os.time)). In POSIX, Windows, and some other systems, this value is exactly `t2`_\-_`t1`.

* * *

### `os.execute ([command])`

This function is equivalent to the ISO C function `system`. It passes `command` to be executed by an operating system shell. Its first result is **true** if the command terminated successfully, or **fail** otherwise. After this first result the function returns a string plus a number, as follows:

*   **"`exit`":** the command terminated normally; the following number is the exit status of the command.
*   **"`signal`":** the command was terminated by a signal; the following number is the signal that terminated the command.

When called without a `command`, `os.execute` returns a boolean that is true if a shell is available.

* * *

### `os.exit ([code [, close]])`

Calls the ISO C function `exit` to terminate the host program. If `code` is **true**, the returned status is `EXIT_SUCCESS`; if `code` is **false**, the returned status is `EXIT_FAILURE`; if `code` is a number, the returned status is this number. The default value for `code` is **true**.

If the optional second argument `close` is true, the function closes the Lua state before exiting (see [`lua_close`](#lua_close)).

* * *

### `os.getenv (varname)`

Returns the value of the process environment variable `varname` or **fail** if the variable is not defined.

* * *

### `os.remove (filename)`

Deletes the file (or empty directory, on POSIX systems) with the given name. If this function fails, it returns **fail** plus a string describing the error and the error code. Otherwise, it returns true.

* * *

### `os.rename (oldname, newname)`

Renames the file or directory named `oldname` to `newname`. If this function fails, it returns **fail**, plus a string describing the error and the error code. Otherwise, it returns true.

* * *

### `os.setlocale (locale [, category])`

Sets the current locale of the program. `locale` is a system-dependent string specifying a locale; `category` is an optional string describing which category to change: `"all"`, `"collate"`, `"ctype"`, `"monetary"`, `"numeric"`, or `"time"`; the default category is `"all"`. The function returns the name of the new locale, or **fail** if the request cannot be honored.

If `locale` is the empty string, the current locale is set to an implementation-defined native locale. If `locale` is the string "`C`", the current locale is set to the standard C locale.

When called with **nil** as the first argument, this function only returns the name of the current locale for the given category.

This function may be not thread safe because of its reliance on C function `setlocale`.

* * *

### `os.time ([table])`

Returns the current time when called without arguments, or a time representing the local date and time specified by the given table. This table must have fields `year`, `month`, and `day`, and may have fields `hour` (default is 12), `min` (default is 0), `sec` (default is 0), and `isdst` (default is **nil**). Other fields are ignored. For a description of these fields, see the [`os.date`](#pdf-os.date) function.

When the function is called, the values in these fields do not need to be inside their valid ranges. For instance, if `sec` is -10, it means 10 seconds before the time specified by the other fields; if `hour` is 1000, it means 1000 hours after the time specified by the other fields.

The returned value is a number, whose meaning depends on your system. In POSIX, Windows, and some other systems, this number counts the number of seconds since some given start time (the "epoch"). In other systems, the meaning is not specified, and the number returned by `time` can be used only as an argument to [`os.date`](#pdf-os.date) and [`os.difftime`](#pdf-os.difftime).

When called with a table, `os.time` also normalizes all the fields documented in the [`os.date`](#pdf-os.date) function, so that they represent the same time as before the call but with values inside their valid ranges.

* * *

### `os.tmpname ()`

Returns a string with a file name that can be used for a temporary file. The file must be explicitly opened before its use and explicitly removed when no longer needed.

In POSIX systems, this function also creates a file with that name, to avoid security risks. (Someone else might create the file with wrong permissions in the time between getting the name and creating the file.) You still have to open the file to use it and to remove it (even if you do not use it).

When possible, you may prefer to use [`io.tmpfile`](#pdf-io.tmpfile), which automatically removes the file when the program ends.

4.10 – The Debug Library
------------------------

This library provides the functionality of the debug interface to Lua programs. You should exert care when using this library. Several of its functions violate basic assumptions about Lua code (e.g., that variables local to a function cannot be accessed from outside; that userdata metatables cannot be changed by Lua code; that Lua programs do not crash) and therefore can compromise otherwise secure code. Moreover, some functions in this library may be slow.

All functions in this library are provided inside the `debug` table. All functions that operate over a thread have an optional first argument which is the thread to operate over. The default is always the current thread.

* * *

### `debug.debug ()`

Enters an interactive mode with the user, running each string that the user enters. Using simple commands and other debug facilities, the user can inspect global and local variables, change their values, evaluate expressions, and so on. A line containing only the word `cont` finishes this function, so that the caller continues its execution.

Note that commands for `debug.debug` are not lexically nested within any function and so have no direct access to local variables.

* * *

### `debug.gethook ([thread])`

Returns the current hook settings of the thread, as three values: the current hook function, the current hook mask, and the current hook count, as set by the [`debug.sethook`](#pdf-debug.sethook) function.

Returns **fail** if there is no active hook.

* * *

### `debug.getinfo ([thread,] f [, what])`

Returns a table with information about a function. You can give the function directly or you can give a number as the value of `f`, which means the function running at level `f` of the call stack of the given thread: level 0 is the current function (`getinfo` itself); level 1 is the function that called `getinfo` (except for tail calls, which do not count in the stack); and so on. If `f` is a number greater than the number of active functions, then `getinfo` returns **fail**.

The returned table can contain all the fields returned by [`lua_getinfo`](#lua_getinfo), with the string `what` describing which fields to fill in. The default for `what` is to get all information available, except the table of valid lines. If present, the option '`f`' adds a field named `func` with the function itself. If present, the option '`L`' adds a field named `activelines` with the table of valid lines.

For instance, the expression `debug.getinfo(1,"n").name` returns a name for the current function, if a reasonable name can be found, and the expression `debug.getinfo(print)` returns a table with all available information about the [`print`](#pdf-print) function.

* * *

### `debug.getlocal ([thread,] f, local)`

This function returns the name and the value of the local variable with index `local` of the function at level `f` of the stack. This function accesses not only explicit local variables, but also parameters and temporary values.

The first parameter or local variable has index 1, and so on, following the order that they are declared in the code, counting only the variables that are active in the current scope of the function. Compile-time constants may not appear in this listing, if they were optimized away by the compiler. Negative indices refer to vararg arguments; -1 is the first vararg argument. The function returns **fail** if there is no variable with the given index, and raises an error when called with a level out of range. (You can call [`debug.getinfo`](#pdf-debug.getinfo) to check whether the level is valid.)

Variable names starting with '`(`' (open parenthesis) represent variables with no known names (internal variables such as loop control variables, and variables from chunks saved without debug information).

The parameter `f` may also be a function. In that case, `getlocal` returns only the name of function parameters.

* * *

### `debug.getmetatable (value)`

Returns the metatable of the given `value` or **nil** if it does not have a metatable.

* * *

### `debug.getregistry ()`

Returns the registry table.

* * *

### `debug.getupvalue (f, up)`

This function returns the name and the value of the upvalue with index `up` of the function `f`. The function returns **fail** if there is no upvalue with the given index.

(For Lua functions, upvalues are the external local variables that the function uses, and that are consequently included in its closure.)

For C functions, this function uses the empty string `""` as a name for all upvalues.

Variable name '`?`' (interrogation mark) represents variables with no known names (variables from chunks saved without debug information).

* * *

### `debug.getuservalue (u, n)`

Returns the `n`\-th user value associated to the userdata `u` plus a boolean, **false** if the userdata does not have that value.

* * *

### `debug.sethook ([thread,] hook, mask [, count])`

Sets the given function as the debug hook. The string `mask` and the number `count` describe when the hook will be called. The string mask may have any combination of the following characters, with the given meaning:

*   **'`c`':** the hook is called every time Lua calls a function;
*   **'`r`':** the hook is called every time Lua returns from a function;
*   **'`l`':** the hook is called every time Lua enters a new line of code.

Moreover, with a `count` different from zero, the hook is called also after every `count` instructions.

When called without arguments, [`debug.sethook`](#pdf-debug.sethook) turns off the hook.

When the hook is called, its first parameter is a string describing the event that has triggered its call: `"call"`, `"tail call"`, `"return"`, `"line"`, and `"count"`. For line events, the hook also gets the new line number as its second parameter. Inside a hook, you can call `getinfo` with level 2 to get more information about the running function. (Level 0 is the `getinfo` function, and level 1 is the hook function.)

* * *

### `debug.setlocal ([thread,] level, local, value)`

This function assigns the value `value` to the local variable with index `local` of the function at level `level` of the stack. The function returns **fail** if there is no local variable with the given index, and raises an error when called with a `level` out of range. (You can call `getinfo` to check whether the level is valid.) Otherwise, it returns the name of the local variable.

See [`debug.getlocal`](#pdf-debug.getlocal) for more information about variable indices and names.

* * *

### `debug.setmetatable (value, table)`

Sets the metatable for the given `value` to the given `table` (which can be **nil**). Returns `value`.

* * *

### `debug.setupvalue (f, up, value)`

This function assigns the value `value` to the upvalue with index `up` of the function `f`. The function returns **fail** if there is no upvalue with the given index. Otherwise, it returns the name of the upvalue.

See [`debug.getupvalue`](#pdf-debug.getupvalue) for more information about upvalues.

* * *

### `debug.setuservalue (udata, value, n)`

Sets the given `value` as the `n`\-th user value associated to the given `udata`. `udata` must be a full userdata.

Returns `udata`, or **fail** if the userdata does not have that value.

* * *

### `debug.traceback ([thread,] [message [, level]])`

If `message` is present but is neither a string nor **nil**, this function returns `message` without further processing. Otherwise, it returns a string with a traceback of the call stack. The optional `message` string is appended at the beginning of the traceback. An optional `level` number tells at which level to start the traceback (default is 1, the function calling `traceback`).

* * *

### `debug.upvalueid (f, n)`

Returns a unique identifier (as a light userdata) for the upvalue numbered `n` from the given function.

These unique identifiers allow a program to check whether different closures share upvalues. Lua closures that share an upvalue (that is, that access a same external local variable) will return identical ids for those upvalue indices.

* * *

### `debug.upvaluejoin (f1, n1, f2, n2)`

Make the `n1`\-th upvalue of the Lua closure `f1` refer to the `n2`\-th upvalue of the Lua closure `f2`.

Last update: Tue May 2 20:09:38 UTC 2023